transmembrane transport. The process in which a solute is transported across a lipid bilayer, from one side of a membrane to the other.
lipid transport. The directed movement of lipids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Lipids are compounds soluble in an organic solvent but not, or sparingly, in an aqueous solvent.
protein metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving a protein. Includes protein modification.
high-density lipoprotein particle remodeling. The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a high-density lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the transfer of cholesterol esters from LDL to a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), with the simultaneous transfer of triglyceride to LDL.
retinoid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving retinoids, any member of a class of isoprenoids that contain or are derived from four prenyl groups linked head-to-tail. Retinoids include retinol and retinal and structurally similar natural derivatives or synthetic compounds, but need not have vitamin A activity.
regulation of cardiac conduction. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cardiac conduction.
bicarbonate transport. The directed movement of bicarbonate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
monoatomic ion transport. The directed movement of a monoatomic ion into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Monatomic ions (also called simple ions) are ions consisting of exactly one atom.
3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate, a naturally occurring mixed anhydride. It is an intermediate in the formation of a variety of sulfo compounds in biological systems.
amino acid transport. The directed movement of amino acids, organic acids containing one or more amino substituents, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
gamma-aminobutyric acid reuptake. The uptake of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 4-aminobutyrate) by neurons or glial cells. This process leads to inactivation and recycling of neurotransmitters.
tryptophan catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of tryptophan, the chiral amino acid 2-amino-3-(1H-indol-3-yl)propanoic acid.
dolichol-linked oligosaccharide biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of dolichol-linked oligosaccharide, usually by a stepwise addition of glycosyl chains to endoplasmic reticulum membrane-bound dolichol-P.
NAD biosynthesis via nicotinamide riboside salvage pathway. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) from the vitamin precursor nicotinamide riboside.
sulfide oxidation, using sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase. A sulfide oxidation process that proceeds via the reaction catalyzed by sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase.
malate-aspartate shuttle. The process of transferring reducing equivalents from the cytosol into the mitochondria; NADH is used to synthesise malate in the cytosol; this compound is then transported into the mitochondria where it is converted to oxaloacetate using NADH, the oxaloacetate reacts with gluamate to form aspartate, and the aspartate then returns to the cytosol to complete the cycle.
hexose transmembrane transport. The process in which hexose is transported across a membrane. Hexoses are aldoses with a chain of six carbon atoms in the molecule.
myo-inositol transport. The directed movement of myo-inositol into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Myo-inositol is 1,2,3,4,5/4,6-cyclohexanehexol, a growth factor for animals and microorganisms.
xenobiotic metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving a xenobiotic compound, a compound foreign to the organim exposed to it. It may be synthesized by another organism (like ampicilin) or it can be a synthetic chemical.
cell redox homeostasis. Any process that maintains the redox environment of a cell or compartment within a cell.
intracellular iron ion homeostasis. A homeostatic process involved in the maintenance of a steady state level of iron ions within a cell.
zinc ion transmembrane transport. A process in which a zinc II ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
insulin processing. The formation of mature insulin by proteolysis of the precursor preproinsulin. The signal sequence is first cleaved from preproinsulin to form proinsulin; proinsulin is then cleaved to release the C peptide, leaving the A and B chains of mature insulin linked by disulfide bridges.
neurotransmitter transport. The directed movement of a neurotransmitter into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Neurotransmitters are any chemical substance that is capable of transmitting (or inhibiting the transmission of) a nerve impulse from a neuron to another cell.
chemical synaptic transmission. The vesicular release of classical neurotransmitter molecules from a presynapse, across a chemical synapse, the subsequent activation of neurotransmitter receptors at the postsynapse of a target cell (neuron, muscle, or secretory cell) and the effects of this activation on the postsynaptic membrane potential and ionic composition of the postsynaptic cytosol. This process encompasses both spontaneous and evoked release of neurotransmitter and all parts of synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Evoked transmission starts with the arrival of an action potential at the presynapse.
phosphatidylcholine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphatidylcholines, any of a class of glycerophospholipids in which the phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of choline.
GDP-L-fucose biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of GDP-L-fucose, a substance composed of L-fucose in glycosidic linkage with guanosine diphosphate.
UDP-glucuronate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of UDP-glucuronate, a substance composed of glucuronic acid in glycosidic linkage with uridine diphosphate.
heparan sulfate proteoglycan biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of the heparan sulfate proteoglycan, a glycosaminoglycan with repeat unit consisting of alternating alpha-(1->4)-linked hexuronic acid and glucosamine residues; the former are a mixture of sulfated and nonsulfated D-glucuronic acid and L-iduronic acid; the L-iduronic acid is either sulfated or acetylated on its amino group as well as being sulfated on one of its hydroxyl groups; heparan sulfate chains are covalently linked to peptidyl-serine by a glycosidic attachment through the trisaccharide galactosyl-galactosyl-xylosyl to serine residues.
long-chain fatty acid transport. The directed movement of a long-chain fatty acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A long-chain fatty acid has an aliphatic tail containing 13 to 22 carbons.
bile acid and bile salt transport. The directed movement of bile acid and bile salts into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
sodium-independent organic anion transport. The directed, sodium-independent, movement of organic anions into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
water transport. The directed movement of water (H2O) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to its receptor, in which the activated receptor promotes the exchange of GDP for GTP on the alpha-subunit of an associated heterotrimeric G-protein complex. The GTP-bound activated alpha-G-protein then dissociates from the beta- and gamma-subunits to further transmit the signal within the cell. The pathway begins with receptor-ligand interaction, and ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process. The pathway can start from the plasma membrane, Golgi or nuclear membrane.
renal water homeostasis. Renal process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of water in the body.
regulation of insulin secretion. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of insulin.
negative regulation of inflammatory response to antigenic stimulus. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate, or extent of an inflammatory response to an antigenic stimulus.
cellular response to glucagon stimulus. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a glucagon stimulus.
glycerol transmembrane transport. The directed movement of glycerol across a membrane. Glycerol is 1,2,3-propanetriol, a sweet, hygroscopic, viscous liquid, widely distributed in nature as a constituent of many lipids.
heme metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring.
cellular response to oxidative stress. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of oxidative stress, a state often resulting from exposure to high levels of reactive oxygen species, e.g. superoxide anions, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radicals.
heme biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring, from less complex precursors.
transferrin transport. The directed movement of transferrin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
insulin receptor recycling. The process that results in the return of an insulin receptor to an active state at the plasma membrane. An active state is when the receptor is ready to receive an insulin signal. Internalized insulin receptors can be recycled to the plasma membrane or sorted to lysosomes for protein degradation.
antimicrobial humoral response. An immune response against microbes mediated through a body fluid. Examples of this process are seen in the antimicrobial humoral response of Drosophila melanogaster and Mus musculus.
monoatomic ion transmembrane transport. A process in which a monoatomic ion is transported across a membrane. Monatomic ions (also called simple ions) are ions consisting of exactly one atom.
blood coagulation. The sequential process in which the multiple coagulation factors of the blood interact, ultimately resulting in the formation of an insoluble fibrin clot; it may be divided into three stages: stage 1, the formation of intrinsic and extrinsic prothrombin converting principle; stage 2, the formation of thrombin; stage 3, the formation of stable fibrin polymers.
response to virus. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a virus.
sensory perception of taste. The series of events required for an organism to receive a gustatory stimulus, convert it to a molecular signal, and recognize and characterize the signal. Gustation involves the direct detection of chemical composition, usually through contact with chemoreceptor cells. This is a neurological process.
calcium ion transmembrane transport. A process in which a calcium ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
mitochondrial calcium ion transmembrane transport. The process in which a calcium ion (Ca2+) is transported across a mitochondrial membrane, into or out of the mitochondrion.
chylomicron assembly. The non-covalent aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids in the intestine to form a chylomicron.
very-low-density lipoprotein particle assembly. The non-covalent aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids in the liver to form a very-low-density lipoprotein particle.
high-density lipoprotein particle assembly. The non-covalent aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids to form a high-density lipoprotein particle.
plasma lipoprotein particle remodeling. The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a plasma lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the esterification of cholesterol by phosphatidylcholine-sterol O-acyltransferase (lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase; LCAT).
chylomicron remodeling. The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a chylomicron, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by lipoprotein lipase and the subsequent loss of free fatty acid.
low-density lipoprotein particle remodeling. The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a low-density lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the transfer of cholesterol esters from LDL to a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), with the simultaneous transfer of triglyceride to LDL.
chylomicron remnant clearance. The process in which a chylomicron remnant is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis into liver cells and its constituent parts degraded.
very-low-density lipoprotein particle clearance. The process in which a very-low-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
low-density lipoprotein particle clearance. The process in which a low-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
high-density lipoprotein particle clearance. The process in which a high-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
low-density lipoprotein particle receptor catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a low-density lipoprotein particle receptor molecule, a macromolecule that undergoes combination with a hormone, neurotransmitter, drug or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell function.
oxygen transport. The directed movement of oxygen (O2) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
nitric oxide metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitric oxide, nitrogen monoxide (NO), a colorless gas only slightly soluble in water.
ceramide transport. The directed movement of ceramides into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Ceramides are a class of lipid composed of sphingosine linked to a fatty acid.
pre-replicative complex assembly. The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form the pre-replicative complex, a protein-DNA complex that forms at the origin of replication during the initial step of DNA replication and allows the origin to become competent, or 'licensed', for replication.
DNA replication initiation. The process in which DNA-dependent DNA replication is started; it begins when specific sequences, known as origins of replication, are recognized and bound by the origin recognition complex, followed by DNA unwinding.
DNA replication. The cellular metabolic process in which a cell duplicates one or more molecules of DNA. DNA replication begins when specific sequences, known as origins of replication, are recognized and bound by the origin recognition complex, and ends when the original DNA molecule has been completely duplicated and the copies topologically separated. The unit of replication usually corresponds to the genome of the cell, an organelle, or a virus. The template for replication can either be an existing DNA molecule or RNA.
DNA strand elongation involved in DNA replication. The process in which an existing DNA strand is extended by activities including the addition of nucleotides to the 3' end of the strand, complementary to an existing template, as part of DNA replication.
T cell receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by the cross-linking of an antigen receptor on a T cell.
positive regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B signal transduction. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B signal transduction.
Fc-epsilon receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of the Fc portion of immunoglobulin E (IgE) to an Fc-epsilon receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. The Fc portion of an immunoglobulin is its C-terminal constant region.
stimulatory C-type lectin receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of C-type lectin to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and resulting in cellular activation.
interleukin-1-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-1 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
T cell costimulation. The process of providing, via surface-bound receptor-ligand pairs, a second, antigen-independent, signal in addition to that provided by the T cell receptor to augment T cell activation.

adaptive immune response. An immune response mediated by cells expressing specific receptors for antigens produced through a somatic diversification process, and allowing for an enhanced secondary response to subsequent exposures to the same antigen (immunological memory).
regulation of opsin-mediated signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of opsin-mediated signaling.
Ras protein signal transduction. An intracellular signaling cassette in which a small monomeric GTPase of the Ras subfamily relays a signal.
protein polyubiquitination. Addition of multiple ubiquitin groups to a protein, forming a ubiquitin chain.
antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen via MHC class I. The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen on its cell surface in association with an MHC class I protein complex. Class I here refers to classical class I molecules.
antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen via MHC class I, TAP-dependent. The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen of exogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC class I protein complex following intracellular transport via a TAP (transporter associated with antigen processing) pathway. The peptide is typically a fragment of a larger exogenous protein which has been degraded within the cell and is dependent on TAP transport from the cytosol to ER for association with the MHC class I molecule. Class I here refers to classical class I molecules.
antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen via MHC class I, TAP-independent. The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen of exogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC class I protein complex following intracellular transport via a pathway not requiring TAP (transporter associated with antigen processing). The peptide is typically a fragment of a larger exogenous protein which has been degraded within the cell. Class I here refers to classical class I molecules.
antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen via MHC class II. The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen of exogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC class II protein complex. The peptide antigen is typically, but not always, processed from a whole protein.
extracellular matrix organization. A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an extracellular matrix.
regulation of immune response. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the immune response, the immunological reaction of an organism to an immunogenic stimulus.
tumor necrosis factor-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by tumor necrosis factor binding to its receptor on the surface of a cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
leukocyte migration. The movement of a leukocyte within or between different tissues and organs of the body.
toll-like receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to a toll-like receptor of a target cell. Toll-like receptors directly bind pattern motifs from a variety of microbial sources to initiate an innate immune response.
toll-like receptor 10 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to toll-like receptor 10.
MyD88-dependent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. A toll-like receptor signaling pathway in which the MyD88 adaptor molecule mediates transduction of the signal. Toll-like receptors directly bind pattern motifs from a variety of microbial sources to initiate an innate immune response.
positive regulation of canonical NF-kappaB signal transduction. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a canonical NF-kappaB signaling cascade.
innate immune response. Innate immune responses are defense responses mediated by germline encoded components that directly recognize components of potential pathogens.
JNK cascade. A MAPK cascade containing at least the JNK (MAPK8) MAP kinase. It starts with the activation of JUN3K (a MAPK3K), which activates JNKK a MAP2K), which in turn activates JNK. The cascade can also contain an additional tier: the upstream MAP4K. The kinases in each tier phosphorylate and activate the kinases in the downstream tier. The JNK cascade is activated by stress signals, as well as by G protein-coupled receptors, growth factors, and cytokines, and results in cellular responses such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, apoptosis and inflammation.
cellular senescence. A cell aging process stimulated in response to cellular stress, whereby normal cells lose the ability to divide through irreversible cell cycle arrest.
p38MAPK cascade. A MAPK cascade containing at least the p38MAPK (MAPK14) MAP kinase, or Hog1 in yeast. It starts with the activation of a MAP3K, and the consecutive activation of a MPK2K and of p38MAPK. The cascade can also contain an additional tier: the upstream MAP4K. The kinases in each tier phosphorylate and activate the kinases in the downstream tier. The p38MAPK cascade is activated by stress signals, including hyperosmolarity, as well as by G protein-coupled receptors, growth factors, and cytokines, and results in cellular responses such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, apoptosis and inflammation.
axon guidance. The chemotaxis process that directs the migration of an axon growth cone to a specific target site in response to a combination of attractive and repulsive cues.
neurotrophin TRK receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by neurotrophin binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell where the receptor possesses tyrosine kinase activity, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
stress-activated MAPK cascade. A MAPK cascade that starts with the activation of a stress-activated MAP kinase cascade.
toll-like receptor 3 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to the endolysosomal toll-like receptor 3.
TRIF-dependent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to a toll-like receptor where the TRIF adaptor mediates transduction of the signal. Toll-like receptors directly bind pattern motifs from a variety of microbial sources to initiate an innate immune response.
MyD88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. A toll-like receptor signaling pathway not relying on the MyD88 adaptor molecule. Toll-like receptors directly bind pattern motifs from a variety of microbial sources to initiate innate an immune response.
canonical NF-kappaB signal transduction. An intracellular signaling cassette characterized by the I-kappaB-kinase (IKK)-dependent activation of NF-kappaB, also known as the canonical NF-kappaB signaling cascade. The cascade begins with activation of a trimeric IKK complex (consisting of catalytic kinase subunits IKKalpha and/or IKKbeta, and the regulatory scaffold protein NEMO) and ends with the regulation of transcription of target genes by NF-kappaB. In a resting state, NF-kappaB dimers are bound to I-kappaB proteins, sequestering NF-kappaB in the cytoplasm. Phosphorylation of I-kappaB targets I-kappaB for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, thus releasing the NF-kappaB dimers, which can translocate to the nucleus to bind DNA and regulate transcription. The canonical NF-kappaB pathway is mainly stimulated by proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1beta, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, antigen ligands, and toll-like receptors (TLRs).
toll-like receptor 5 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to toll-like receptor 5.
toll-like receptor 9 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to the endolysosomal toll-like receptor 9.
toll-like receptor 4 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to toll-like receptor 4.
activation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic signaling pathway. Any process that initiates the activity of an inactive cysteine-type endopeptidase involved in the apoptotic signaling pathway.
toll-like receptor TLR1:TLR2 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding of a heterodimeric TLR1:TLR2 complex, followed by transmission of the signal by the activated receptor, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
toll-like receptor TLR6:TLR2 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding of a heterodimeric TLR6:TLR2 complex, followed by transmission of the signal by the activated receptor, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
pyroptosis. A caspase-1-dependent cell death subroutine that is associated with the generation of pyrogenic mediators such as IL-1beta and IL-18.
complement activation, lectin pathway. Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the lectin pathway of the complement cascade which allows for the direct killing of microbes and the regulation of other immune processes.
complement activation, classical pathway. Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the classical pathway of the complement cascade which allows for the direct killing of microbes, the disposal of immune complexes, and the regulation of other immune processes.
complement activation. Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the complement cascade, which allows for the direct killing of microbes, the disposal of immune complexes, and the regulation of other immune processes; the initial steps of complement activation involve one of three pathways, the classical pathway, the alternative pathway, and the lectin pathway, all of which lead to the terminal complement pathway.
complement activation, alternative pathway. Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the alternative pathway of the complement cascade which allows for the direct killing of microbes and the regulation of other immune processes.
regulation of complement activation. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of complement activation.
purinergic nucleotide receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by an extracellular purine nucleotide binding to its receptor, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
obsolete nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing signaling pathway. OBSOLETE. The series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of a ligand (such as a bacterial peptidoglycan) to a cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing (NOD) protein receptor, and ending with regulation of a downstream cellular process.
protein deubiquitination. The removal of one or more ubiquitin groups from a protein.
nucleotide-binding domain, leucine rich repeat containing receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to a nucleotide-binding domain, leucine rich repeat containing receptor (NLR), and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process. NLRs are cytoplasmic receptors defined by their tripartite domain architecture that contains: a variable C-terminus, a middle nucleotide-binding domain, and a LRR domain that is variable in the repeats composition and number.
positive regulation of type I interferon production. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate, or extent of type I interferon production. Type I interferons include the interferon-alpha, beta, delta, episilon, zeta, kappa, tau, and omega gene families.
modulation by virus of host cellular process. The process in which a virus effects a change in the processes and activities of its host organism.
negative regulation of type I interferon production. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate, or extent of type I interferon production. Type I interferons include the interferon-alpha, beta, delta, episilon, zeta, kappa, tau, and omega gene families.
cytokine-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of a cytokine to a receptor on the surface of a cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
regulation of type I interferon production. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of interferon type I production. Type I interferons include the interferon-alpha, beta, delta, episilon, zeta, kappa, tau, and omega gene families.
Fc-gamma receptor signaling pathway involved in phagocytosis. An Fc-gamma receptor signaling pathway that contributes to the endocytic engulfment of external particulate material by phagocytes.
small GTPase-mediated signal transduction. An intracellular signaling cassette in which a small monomeric GTPase relays a signal.
Wnt signaling pathway, calcium modulating pathway. A type of non-canonical Wnt signaling in which Wnt binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell leads to an increase in intracellular calcium and activation of protein kinase C (PKC).
non-canonical NF-kappaB signal transduction. An intracellular signaling cassette characterized by the NIK-dependent processing and activation of NF-kappaB. Begins with activation of the NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK), which in turn phosphorylates and activates IkappaB kinase alpha (IKKalpha). IKKalpha phosphorylates the NF-kappa B2 protein (p100) leading to p100 processing and release of an active NF-kappaB (p52). The non-canonical NF-kappaB signaling pathway is generally activated by ligands of the TNF receptor superfamily, including lymphotoxin beta (LTB), CD40, OX40, RANK, TWEAK and B cell-activating factor (BAFF).
neutrophil degranulation. The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as proteases, lipases, and inflammatory mediators by a neutrophil.
cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of a ligand from another organism to a cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptor (PRR). PRRs bind pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMPs), structures conserved among microbial species.
type I interferon-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by type I interferon binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. Type I interferons include the interferon-alpha, beta, delta, episilon, zeta, kappa, tau, and omega gene families.
regulation of type I interferon-mediated signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of a type I interferon-mediated signaling pathway.
type II interferon-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interferon-gamma binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. Interferon gamma is the only member of the type II interferon found so far.
negative regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of transcription mediated by RNA polymerase II.
regulation of type II interferon-mediated signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of an interferon-gamma-mediated signaling pathway.
defense response to virus. Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a virus that act to protect the cell or organism.
PKR/eIFalpha signaling. An intracellular signaling cassette that starts with activation and autophosphorylation of PKR (also known as EIF2AK2), which phosphorylates proteins including the translation initiation factor eIF2 to inhibit translation. PKR is activated by stress signals and during the antiviral response, activated by binding to viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) leading to inhibition of protein synthesis during viral infection.
protein sumoylation. The process in which a SUMO protein (small ubiquitin-related modifier) is conjugated to a target protein via an isopeptide bond between the carboxy-terminus of SUMO with an epsilon-amino group of a lysine residue of the target protein.
virus-mediated perturbation of host defense response. A process in which a virus interferes with the ability of the host to mount a defense in response to its presence. Host defenses may be induced by the presence of the virus or may be preformed (e.g. physical barriers). The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
interleukin-18-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-18 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-33-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-33 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
cellular response to cytokine stimulus. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cytokine stimulus.
interleukin-2-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-2 binding to its receptor on the surface of a cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-7-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-7 binding to its receptor on the surface of a cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-9-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-9 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-15-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-15 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-21-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-21 binding to a receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
positive regulation of intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway.
interleukin-27-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-27 binding to a receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-6-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-6 binding to a receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
chromatin organization. The assembly or remodeling of chromatin composed of DNA complexed with histones, other associated proteins, and sometimes RNA.
interleukin-12-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-12 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-23-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-23 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-35-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-35 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
interleukin-17-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by interleukin-17 binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
growth hormone receptor signaling pathway via JAK-STAT. The process in which STAT proteins (Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription) are activated by members of the JAK (janus activated kinase) family of tyrosine kinases, following the binding of physiological ligands to the growth hormone receptor. Once activated, STATs dimerize and translocate to the nucleus and modulate the expression of target genes.
response to cytokine. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cytokine stimulus.
protein targeting to mitochondrion. The process of directing proteins towards and into the mitochondrion, usually mediated by mitochondrial proteins that recognize signals contained within the imported protein.
protein localization. Any process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
protein ubiquitination. The process in which one or more ubiquitin groups are added to a protein.
protein processing. Any protein maturation process achieved by the cleavage of a peptide bond or bonds within a protein. Protein maturation is the process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of a protein.
protein import into peroxisome membrane. The targeting of proteins into the peroxisomal membrane. The process is not well understood, but both signals and mechanism differ from those involved in peroxisomal matrix protein import.
protein insertion into ER membrane. The process that results in incorporation of a protein into an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. It depends on specific topogenic sequences of amino acids that ensure that a protein acquires the proper orientation during its insertion into the ER membrane.
muscle contraction. A process in which force is generated within muscle tissue, resulting in a change in muscle geometry. Force generation involves a chemo-mechanical energy conversion step that is carried out by the actin/myosin complex activity, which generates force through ATP hydrolysis.
platelet activation. A series of progressive, overlapping events triggered by exposure of the platelets to subendothelial tissue. These events include shape change, adhesiveness, aggregation, and release reactions. When carried through to completion, these events lead to the formation of a stable hemostatic plug.
arachidonic acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving arachidonic acid, a straight chain fatty acid with 20 carbon atoms and four double bonds per molecule. Arachidonic acid is the all-Z-(5,8,11,14)-isomer.
platelet degranulation. The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as histamine and serotonin by a platelet.
blood coagulation, extrinsic pathway. A protein activation cascade that contributes to blood coagulation and consists of the self-limited process linking exposure and activation of tissue factor to the activation of clotting factor X.
blood coagulation, intrinsic pathway. A protein activation cascade that contributes to blood coagulation and consists of the interactions among high molecular weight kininogen, prekallikrein, and factor XII that lead to the activation of clotting factor X.
fibrinolysis. A process that solubilizes fibrin in the bloodstream of a multicellular organism, chiefly by the proteolytic action of plasmin.
extracellular matrix disassembly. A process that results in the breakdown of the extracellular matrix.
cell surface receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by an extracellular ligand binding to a receptor located on the cell surface. The pathway ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
microtubule-based movement. A microtubule-based process that results in the movement of organelles, other microtubules, or other cellular components. Examples include motor-driven movement along microtubules and movement driven by polymerization or depolymerization of microtubules.
glycogen biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycogen, a polydisperse, highly branched glucan composed of chains of D-glucose residues.
glycogen catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycogen, a polydisperse, highly branched glucan composed of chains of D-glucose residues.
galactose catabolic process via UDP-galactose. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of galactose, via the intermediate UDP-galactose.
pyruvate metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving pyruvate, 2-oxopropanoate.
gluconeogenesis. The formation of glucose from noncarbohydrate precursors, such as pyruvate, amino acids and glycerol.
regulation of transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of a process involved in starting transcription from an RNA polymerase II promoter.
regulation of glycolytic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of glycolysis.
canonical glycolysis. The glycolytic process that begins with the conversion of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate by glucokinase activity. Glycolytic processes are the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a carbohydrate into pyruvate, with the concomitant production of a small amount of ATP.
regulation of gene expression. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of gene expression. Gene expression is the process in which a gene's coding sequence is converted into a mature gene product (protein or RNA).
protein kinase A signaling. An intracellular signaling cassette that starts with the activation of protein kinase A (PKA), and ends with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. The PKA catalytic subunit (PKA-C) is normally present in a complex with its regulatory subunit, PKA-R. The inhibitory action of PKA-R is released upon cAMP binding, which results in the activation of PKA-C.
regulation of glycolytic process through fructose-6-phosphate. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of glycolytic process through fructose-6-phosphate.
fructose biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of fructose, the ketohexose arabino-2-hexulose.
fructose catabolic process to hydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of fructose that results in the formation of dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
lactose biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of lactose, the disaccharide galactopyranosyl-glucose.
pentose-phosphate shunt. The metabolic process in which glucose-6-phosphate is oxidized to form carbon dioxide (CO2) and ribulose 5-phosphate, coupled to reduction of NADP+ to NADPH; ribulose 5-P then enters a series of reactions that can yield biosynthetic precursors (ribose-5-phosphate and erythrose-4-phosphate) and glycolytic intermediates (fructose-6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate).
xylulose biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of xylulose, the ketopentose threo-2-pentulose.
5-phosphoribose 1-diphosphate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of 5-phosphoribose 1-diphosphate, also known as 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate.
hyaluronan biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of hyaluronan, the naturally occurring anionic form of hyaluronic acid, any member of a group of glycosaminoglycans, the repeat units of which consist of beta-1,4 linked D-glucuronyl-beta-(1,3)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.
hyaluronan catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of hyaluronan, the naturally occurring anionic form of hyaluronic acid, any member of a group of glycosaminoglycans, the repeat units of which consist of beta-1,4 linked D-glucuronyl-beta-(1,3)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.
keratan sulfate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of keratan sulfate, a glycosaminoglycan with repeat units consisting of beta-1,4-linked D-galactopyranosyl-beta-(1,4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-sulfate and with variable amounts of fucose, sialic acid and mannose units; keratan sulfate chains are covalently linked by a glycosidic attachment through the trisaccharide galactosyl-galactosyl-xylose to peptidyl-threonine or serine residues.
keratan sulfate catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of keratan sulfate, a glycosaminoglycan with repeat units consisting of beta-1,4-linked D-galactopyranosyl-beta-(1,4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-sulfate and with variable amounts of fucose, sialic acid and mannose units; keratan sulfate chains are covalently linked by a glycosidic attachment through the trisaccharide galactosyl-galactosyl-xylose to peptidyl-threonine or serine residues.
glycosaminoglycan metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycosaminoglycans, any of a group of polysaccharides that contain amino sugars.
heparan sulfate proteoglycan catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of proteoglycan containing heparan sulfate, any member of a group of glycosaminoglycans that have repeat units consisting of alternating alpha-(1->4) linked hexuronic acid and glucosamine residues, the former being a mixture of sulfated and nonsulfated D-glucuronic and L-iduronic acids, and the latter being either sulfated or acetylated on its amino group as well as sulfated on one of its hydroxyl groups.
chondroitin sulfate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of chondroitin sulfate, any member of a group of 10-60 kDa glycosaminoglycans, widely distributed in cartilage and other mammalian connective tissues, the repeat units of which consist of beta-(1,4)-linked D-glucuronyl beta-(1,3)-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine sulfate.
dermatan sulfate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of dermatan sulfate, any glycosaminoglycan with repeats consisting of beta-(1,4)-linked L-iduronyl-beta-(1,3)-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine 4-sulfate units.
glycosaminoglycan catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycosaminoglycans, any one of a group of polysaccharides that contain amino sugars.
glucuronate catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glucuronate into other compounds, including xylulose 5-phosphate.
oligosaccharide catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of oligosaccharides, molecules with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages.
oligosaccharide biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of oligosaccharides, molecules with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages.
peptide biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of peptides, compounds of 2 or more (but usually less than 100) amino acids where the alpha carboxyl group of one is bound to the alpha amino group of another. This may include the translation of a precursor protein and its subsequent processing into a functional peptide.
inositol phosphate metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving inositol phosphate, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol, with one or more phosphate groups attached.
myo-inositol phosphate transport. The directed movement of any phosphorylated myo-inositol into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
phosphatidylinositol biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphatidylinositol, any glycophospholipid in which the sn-glycerol 3-phosphate residue is esterified to the 1-hydroxyl group of 1D-myo-inositol.
regulation of lipid metabolic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving lipids.
regulation of metabolic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways within a cell or an organism.
mitochondrion organization. A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a mitochondrion; includes mitochondrial morphogenesis and distribution, and replication of the mitochondrial genome as well as synthesis of new mitochondrial components.
white fat cell differentiation. The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a white adipocyte, an animal connective tissue cell involved in energy storage. White adipocytes have cytoplasmic lipids arranged in a unique vacuole.
circadian rhythm. Any biological process in an organism that recurs with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
lipid droplet organization. A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a lipid particle.
fatty-acyl-CoA biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a fatty-acyl-CoA, any derivative of coenzyme A in which the sulfhydryl group is in thiolester linkage with a fatty-acyl group.
long-chain fatty-acyl-CoA biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a long-chain fatty-acyl-CoA any derivative of coenzyme A in which the sulfhydryl group is in a thioester linkage with a long-chain fatty-acyl group. A long-chain fatty acid has an aliphatic tail containing 13 to 22 carbons.
wax biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of wax, which includes C16 and C18 fatty acids.
cyclooxygenase pathway. The chemical reactions and pathways by which prostaglandins are formed from arachidonic acid, and in which prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase (cyclooxygenase) catalyzes the committed step in the conversion of arachidonic acid to the prostaglandin-endoperoxides PGG2 and PGH2.
prostanoid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving prostanoids, any compound based on or derived from the prostanoate structure.
icosanoid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving icosanoids, any of a group of C20 polyunsaturated fatty acids.
leukotriene metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving leukotriene, a pharmacologically active substance derived from a polyunsaturated fatty acid, such as arachidonic acid.
lipoxygenase pathway. The chemical reactions and pathways by which an unsaturated fatty acid (such as arachidonic acid or linolenic acid) is converted to other compounds, and in which the first step is hydroperoxide formation catalyzed by lipoxygenase.
lipoxin biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a lipoxin. A lipoxin is a non-classic eicosanoid and signaling molecule that has four conjugated double bonds and is derived from arachidonic acid.
hepoxilin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving hepoxilins, a class of bioactive icosanoids with roles in the regulation of cell physiology.
omega-hydroxylase P450 pathway. The chemical reactions and pathways by which arachidonic acid is converted to other compounds initially by omega-hydroxylation.
epoxygenase P450 pathway. The chemical reactions and pathways by which arachidonic acid is converted to other compounds including epoxyeicosatrienoic acids and dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids.
alpha-linolenic acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving alpha-linolenic acid, an unsaturated omega-6 fatty acid that has the molecular formula C18H32O2.
linoleic acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving linoleic acid, an unsaturated omega-6 fatty acid that has the molecular formula C18H32O2.
carnitine shuttle. The transfer of acyl groups to and from acyl-CoA molecules to form O-acylcarnitine, which can exchange across the mitochondrial inner membrane with unacylated carnitine.
fatty acid beta-oxidation. A fatty acid oxidation process that results in the complete oxidation of a long-chain fatty acid. Fatty acid beta-oxidation begins with the addition of coenzyme A to a fatty acid, and occurs by successive cycles of reactions during each of which the fatty acid is shortened by a two-carbon fragment removed as acetyl coenzyme A; the cycle continues until only two or three carbons remain (as acetyl-CoA or propionyl-CoA respectively).
short-chain fatty acid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a short-chain fatty acid. A short-chain fatty acid has an aliphatic tail containing fewer than 6 carbons.
fatty acid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a fatty acid, any of the aliphatic monocarboxylic acids that can be liberated by hydrolysis from naturally occurring fats and oils. Fatty acids are predominantly straight-chain acids of 4 to 24 carbon atoms, which may be saturated or unsaturated; branched fatty acids and hydroxy fatty acids also occur, and very long chain acids of over 30 carbons are found in waxes.
fatty acid alpha-oxidation. A metabolic pathway by which 3-methyl branched fatty acids are degraded. These compounds are not degraded by the normal peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway, because the 3-methyl blocks the dehydrogenation of the hydroxyl group by hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. The 3-methyl branched fatty acid is converted in several steps to pristenic acid, which can then feed into the beta-oxidative pathway.
fatty acid beta-oxidation using acyl-CoA oxidase. A fatty acid beta-oxidation pathway in which the initial step, which converts an acyl-CoA to a trans-2-enoyl-CoA, is catalyzed by acyl-CoA oxidase; the electrons removed by oxidation pass directly to oxygen and produce hydrogen peroxide, which is cleaved by peroxisomal catalases. Fatty acid beta-oxidation begins with the addition of coenzyme A to a fatty acid, and ends when only two or three carbons remain (as acetyl-CoA or propionyl-CoA respectively).
triglyceride biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a triglyceride, any triester of glycerol.
triglyceride catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a triglyceride, any triester of glycerol.
phosphatidic acid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphatidic acid, any derivative of glycerol phosphate in which both the remaining hydroxyl groups of the glycerol moiety are esterified with fatty acids.
digestion. The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by multicellular organisms to break down ingested nutrients into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
acylglycerol acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of an acylglycerol, through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate an acylglycerol containing different types of fatty acid acyl chains.
phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphatidylethanolamine, any of a class of glycerophospholipids in which a phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of ethanolamine.
phosphatidylethanolamine acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of phosphatidylethanolamine, through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate phosphatidylethanolamine containing different types of fatty acid acyl chains.
phospholipid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving phospholipids, any lipid containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
phospholipid transport. The directed movement of phospholipids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Phospholipids are any lipids containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
phosphatidylcholine acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of phosphatidylcholine, through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate phosphatidylcholine containing different types of fatty acid acyl chains.
phosphatidylserine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphatidylserines, any of a class of glycerophospholipids in which the phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of L-serine.
phosphatidylserine acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of phosphatidylserine, through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate phosphatidylserine containing different types of fatty acid acyl chains.
phosphatidylinositol acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of phosphatidylinositol, through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate phosphatidylinositol containing different types of fatty acid acyl chains.
phosphatidylglycerol biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphatidylglycerols, any of a class of phospholipids in which the phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of glycerol.
phosphatidylglycerol acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of phosphatidylglycerol, through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate phosphatidylglycerol containing different types of fatty acid acyl chains.
cardiolipin biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cardiolipin, 1,3-bis(3-phosphatidyl)glycerol.
cardiolipin acyl-chain remodeling. Remodeling the acyl chains of premature (de novo synthesized) cardiolipin (1,3-bis(3-phosphatidyl)glycerol), through sequential deacylation and re-acylation reactions, to generate mature cardiolipin containing high-levels of unsaturated fatty acids.
lysobisphosphatidic acid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a lysobisphosphatidic acid. A lysobisphosphatidic acid is a lysophosphatidic acid having the unusual property of a phosphodiester moiety linked to positions sn-1 and sn1' of glycerol; and two additional fatty acids esterified to the glycerol head group.
glycerophospholipid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycerophospholipids, any derivative of glycerophosphate that contains at least one O-acyl, O-alkyl, or O-alkenyl group attached to the glycerol residue.
phospholipid translocation. The movement of a phospholipid molecule from one leaflet of a membrane bilayer to the opposite leaflet.
obsolete regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling. OBSOLETE. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of signal transduction mediated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase cascade.
glycerophospholipid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycerophospholipids, any derivative of glycerophosphate that contains at least one O-acyl, O-alkyl, or O-alkenyl group attached to the glycerol residue.
regulation of signal transduction by p53 class mediator. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of signal transduction by p53 class mediator.
sphingolipid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of sphingolipids, any of a class of lipids containing the long-chain amine diol sphingosine or a closely related base (a sphingoid).
glycosphingolipid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycosphingolipid, a compound with residues of sphingoid and at least one monosaccharide.
glycosphingolipid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycosphingolipid, a compound with residues of sphingoid and at least one monosaccharide.
post-translational protein modification. The process of covalently altering one or more amino acids in a protein after the protein has been completely translated and released from the ribosome.
sphingolipid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of sphingolipids, any of a class of lipids containing the long-chain amine diol sphingosine or a closely related base (a sphingoid).
cholesterol biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cholesterol, cholest-5-en-3 beta-ol, the principal sterol of vertebrates and the precursor of many steroids, including bile acids and steroid hormones.
dolichyl diphosphate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of dolichyl diphosphate, a diphosphorylated dolichol derivative.
sterol metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving sterols, steroids with one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
cholesterol biosynthetic process via desmosterol. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cholesterol, cholest-5-en-3 beta-ol, via the intermediate desmosterol.
cholesterol biosynthetic process via lathosterol. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cholesterol, cholest-5-en-3 beta-ol, via the intermediate lathosterol.
regulation of cholesterol biosynthetic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cholesterol.
bile acid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of bile acids, any of a group of steroid carboxylic acids occurring in bile.
C21-steroid hormone biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of C21-steroid hormones, steroid compounds containing 21 carbons which function as hormones.
androgen biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of androgens, C19 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of male sexual characteristics.
glucocorticoid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glucocorticoids, hormonal C21 corticosteroids synthesized from cholesterol.
mineralocorticoid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of mineralocorticoids, hormonal C21 corticosteroids synthesized from cholesterol.
estrogen biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of estrogens, C18 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of female sexual characteristics. Also found in plants.
steroid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving steroids, compounds with a 1,2,cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene nucleus.
vitamin D metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving vitamin D, any of a group of related, fat-soluble compounds that are derived from delta-5,7 steroids and play a central role in calcium metabolism. Specific forms of vitamin D include calciferol (ergocalciferol; vitamin D2) and cholecalciferol (calciol; vitamin D3).
vitamin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving vitamins. Vitamin is a general term for a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body. Vitamins may be water-soluble or fat-soluble and usually serve as components of coenzyme systems.
ether lipid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ether lipids, lipids that contain (normally) one lipid alcohol in ether linkage to one of the carbon atoms (normally C-1) of glycerol.
ketone body biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ketone bodies, any one of the three substances: acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate (beta-hydroxybutyrate) or acetone. Biosynthesis involves the formation of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA, which is cleaved to acetate and acetyl-CoA.
ketone body catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ketone bodies, any one of the three substances: acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate (beta-hydroxybutyrate) or acetone. Ketone bodies can be used as an energy source as an alternative to glucose. Utilization of ketone bodies in peripheral tissues involves conversion of acetoacetate to acetoacetyl-CoA, which is then converted to two molecules of acetyl-CoA.
long-chain fatty acid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a long-chain fatty acid. A long-chain fatty acid has an aliphatic tail containing 13 to 22 carbons.
negative regulation of insulin secretion. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of insulin.
positive regulation of insulin secretion. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of insulin.
fatty acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving fatty acids, aliphatic monocarboxylic acids liberated from naturally occurring fats and oils by hydrolysis.
regulation of generation of precursor metabolites and energy. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of precursor metabolites, substances from which energy is derived, and the processes involved in the liberation of energy from these substances.
regulation of fatty acid biosynthetic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of fatty acids, any of the aliphatic monocarboxylic acids that can be liberated by hydrolysis from naturally occurring fats and oils.
positive regulation of cellular metabolic process. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways by which individual cells transform chemical substances.
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) on the surface of the target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
tetrahydrobiopterin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetrahydrobiopterin, the reduced form of biopterin (2-amino-4-hydroxy-6-(1,2-dihydroxypropyl)-pteridine). It functions as a hydroxylation coenzyme, e.g. in the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine.
pyruvate family amino acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving any amino acid that requires pyruvate for its synthesis, e.g. alanine.
acetyl-CoA biosynthetic process from pyruvate. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate.
regulation of acetyl-CoA biosynthetic process from pyruvate. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate.
regulation of small molecule metabolic process. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of a small molecule metabolic process.
tricarboxylic acid cycle. A nearly universal metabolic pathway in which the acetyl group of acetyl coenzyme A is effectively oxidized to two CO2 and four pairs of electrons are transferred to coenzymes. The acetyl group combines with oxaloacetate to form citrate, which undergoes successive transformations to isocitrate, 2-oxoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, succinate, fumarate, malate, and oxaloacetate again, thus completing the cycle. In eukaryotes the tricarboxylic acid is confined to the mitochondria. See also glyoxylate cycle.
succinyl-CoA biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of succinyl-CoA.
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I assembly. The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I.
respiratory electron transport chain. A process in which a series of electron carriers operate together to transfer electrons from donors such as NADH and FADH2 to any of several different terminal electron acceptors to generate a transmembrane electrochemical gradient.
aspartate family amino acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids of the aspartate family, comprising asparagine, aspartate, lysine, methionine and threonine.
glutamine family amino acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids of the glutamine family, comprising arginine, glutamate, glutamine and proline.
proton motive force-driven mitochondrial ATP synthesis. The transport of protons across a mitochondrial membrane to generate an electrochemical gradient (proton-motive force) that powers ATP synthesis.
proton transmembrane transport. The directed movement of a proton across a membrane.
adaptive thermogenesis. The regulated production of heat in response to short term environmental changes, such as stress, diet or reduced temperature.
2-oxoglutarate metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving oxoglutarate, the dianion of 2-oxoglutaric acid. It is a key constituent of the TCA cycle and a key intermediate in amino-acid metabolism.
purine ribonucleoside monophosphate biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of purine ribonucleoside monophosphate, a compound consisting of a purine base linked to a ribose sugar esterified with phosphate on the sugar.
pyrimidine nucleoside biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of one of a family of organic molecules consisting of a pyrimidine base covalently bonded to a sugar ribose (a ribonucleoside) or deoxyribose (a deoxyribonucleoside).
nucleobase-containing small molecule interconversion. The chemical reactions and pathways by which a nucleobase, nucleoside or nucleotide small molecule is synthesized from another nucleobase, nucleoside or nucleotide small molecule.
purine-containing compound salvage. Any process that generates a purine-containing compound, any nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide or nucleic acid that contains a purine base, from derivatives of them without de novo synthesis.
pyrimidine nucleoside salvage. Any process that generates a pyrimidine nucleoside, one of a family of organic molecules consisting of a pyrimidine base covalently bonded to a sugar ribose, from derivatives of it, without de novo synthesis.
purine nucleotide catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a purine nucleotide, a compound consisting of nucleoside (a purine base linked to a deoxyribose or ribose sugar) esterified with a phosphate group at either the 3' or 5'-hydroxyl group of the sugar.
nucleobase-containing small molecule metabolic process. The cellular chemical reactions and pathways involving a nucleobase-containing small molecule: a nucleobase, a nucleoside, or a nucleotide.
pyrimidine nucleoside catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of one of a family of organic molecules consisting of a pyrimidine base covalently bonded to a sugar ribose (a ribonucleoside) or deoxyribose (a deoxyribonucleoside).
nucleobase-containing small molecule catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a nucleobase-containing small molecule: a nucleobase, a nucleoside, or a nucleotide.
L-ascorbic acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving L-ascorbic acid, (2R)-2-[(1S)-1,2-dihydroxyethyl]-4-hydroxy-5-oxo-2,5-dihydrofuran-3-olate; L-ascorbic acid is vitamin C and has co-factor and anti-oxidant activities in many species.
thiamine-containing compound metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving thiamine (vitamin B1), and compounds derived from it.
riboflavin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving riboflavin (vitamin B2), the precursor for the coenzymes flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD).
pantothenate metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving pantothenate, the anion of pantothenic acid, the amide of beta-alanine and pantoic acid. It is a B complex vitamin that is a constituent of coenzyme A and is distributed ubiquitously in foods.
coenzyme A biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of coenzyme A, 3'-phosphoadenosine-(5')diphospho(4')pantatheine, an acyl carrier in many acylation and acyl-transfer reactions in which the intermediate is a thiol ester.
vitamin B6 metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of the vitamin B6 compounds: pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine and the active form, pyridoxal phosphate.
cobalamin transport. The directed movement of cobalamin (vitamin B12), a water-soluble vitamin characterized by possession of a corrin nucleus containing a cobalt atom, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
cobalamin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving cobalamin (vitamin B12), a water-soluble vitamin characterized by possession of a corrin nucleus containing a cobalt atom.
methylation. The process in which a methyl group is covalently attached to a molecule.
biotin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving biotin, cis-tetrahydro-2-oxothieno(3,4-d)imidazoline-4-valeric acid; the (+) enantiomer is very widely distributed in cells and serves as a carrier in a number of enzymatic beta-carboxylation reactions.
NAD metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), a coenzyme present in most living cells and derived from the B vitamin nicotinic acid.
folic acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving folic acid, pteroylglutamic acid. Folic acid is widely distributed as a member of the vitamin B complex and is essential for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidines.
molybdopterin cofactor biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of the molybdopterin cofactor (Moco), essential for the catalytic activity of some enzymes, e.g. sulfite oxidase, xanthine dehydrogenase, and aldehyde oxidase. The cofactor consists of a mononuclear molybdenum (Mo-molybdopterin) or tungsten ion (W-molybdopterin) coordinated by one or two molybdopterin ligands.
vitamin K metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of the forms of vitamin K, quinone-derived vitamins which are involved in the synthesis of blood-clotting factors in mammals. Vitamin K substances share a methylated naphthoquinone ring structure and vary in the aliphatic side chains attached to the molecule.
lipid digestion. The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by living organisms to break down ingested lipids into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
vitamin E metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving vitamin E, tocopherol, which includes a series of eight structurally similar compounds. Alpha-tocopherol is the most active form in humans and is a powerful biological antioxidant.
ubiquinone biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ubiquinone, a lipid-soluble electron-transporting coenzyme.
NADPH regeneration. A metabolic process that generates a pool of NADPH by the reduction of NADP+.
neurotransmitter uptake. The directed movement of neurotransmitters into neurons or glial cells. This process leads to inactivation and recycling of neurotransmitters.
branched-chain amino acid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of amino acids containing a branched carbon skeleton, comprising isoleucine, leucine and valine.
histidine catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of histidine, 2-amino-3-(1H-imidazol-4-yl)propanoic acid.
lysine catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of lysine, 2,6-diaminohexanoic acid.
collagen catabolic process. The proteolytic chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of collagen in the extracellular matrix, usually carried out by proteases secreted by nearby cells.
L-phenylalanine metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving L-phenylalanine, the L-enantiomer of 2-amino-3-phenylpropanoic acid, i.e. (2S)-2-amino-3-phenylpropanoic acid.
tyrosine catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of tyrosine, an aromatic amino acid, 2-amino-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid.
proline catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of proline (pyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid), a chiral, cyclic, nonessential alpha-amino acid found in peptide linkage in proteins.
L-serine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of L-serine, the L-enantiomer of serine, i.e. (2S)-2-amino-3-hydroxypropanoic acid.
L-threonine catabolic process to glycine. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of L-threonine (the L-enantiomer of 2-amino-3-hydroxybutyric acid) to form to form 2-amino-3-oxobutanoate, which is subsequently converted to glycine.
L-methionine salvage from methylthioadenosine. The generation of L-methionine (2-amino-4-(methylthio)butanoic acid) from methylthioadenosine.
choline catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of choline (2-hydroxyethyltrimethylammonium), an amino alcohol that occurs widely in living organisms as a constituent of certain types of phospholipids and in the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
sulfur amino acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids containing sulfur, comprising cysteine, homocysteine, methionine and selenocysteine.
transsulfuration. The interconversion of homocysteine and cysteine via cystathionine. In contrast with enteric bacteria and mammals, Saccharomyces cerevisiae has two transsulfuration pathways employing two separate sets of enzymes.
sulfur amino acid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of amino acids containing sulfur, comprising cysteine, methionine and selenocysteine.
selenium compound metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving compounds that contain selenium, such as selenocysteine.
selenocysteine metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving selenocysteine, an essential component of glutathione peroxidase and some other proteins.
carboxylic acid metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving carboxylic acids, any organic acid containing one or more carboxyl (COOH) groups or anions (COO-).
glycine catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycine, aminoethanoic acid.
urea cycle. The sequence of reactions by which arginine is synthesized from ornithine, then cleaved to yield urea and regenerate ornithine. The overall reaction equation is NH3 + CO2 + aspartate + 3 ATP + 2 H2O = urea + fumarate + 2 ADP + 2 phosphate + AMP + diphosphate.
carnitine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of carnitine (hydroxy-trimethyl aminobutyric acid), a compound that participates in the transfer of acyl groups across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
creatine metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving creatine (N-(aminoiminomethyl)-N-methylglycine), a compound synthesized from the amino acids arginine, glycine, and methionine that occurs in muscle.
agmatine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of agmatine ((4-aminobutyl)guanidine, NH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-NH-C(-NH2)(=NH)). Agmatine is the decarboxylation product of the amino acid arginine and is an intermediate in polyamine biosynthesis. It is synthesized in the brain, stored in synaptic vesicles, accumulated by uptake, released by membrane depolarization, and inactivated by agmatinase.
polyamine metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving polyamines, any organic compound containing two or more amino groups.
polyamine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of polyamines, any organic compound containing two or more amino groups.
regulation of cellular amino acid metabolic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids.
melanin biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of melanins, pigments largely of animal origin. High molecular weight polymers of indole quinone, they are irregular polymeric structures and are divided into three groups: allomelanins in the plant kingdom and eumelanins and phaeomelanins in the animal kingdom.
catecholamine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of any of a group of physiologically important biogenic amines that possess a catechol (3,4-dihydroxyphenyl) nucleus and are derivatives of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine.
thyroid hormone generation. The formation of either of the compounds secreted by the thyroid gland, mainly thyroxine and triiodothyronine. This is achieved by the iodination and joining of tyrosine molecules to form the precursor thyroglobin, proteolysis of this precursor gives rise to the thyroid hormones.
thyroid hormone metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of the compounds secreted by the thyroid gland, largely thyroxine and triiodothyronine.
indolalkylamine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of indolalkylamines, indole or indole derivatives containing a primary, secondary, or tertiary amine group.
heme catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring.
cellular glucuronidation. The modification of an organic chemical by the conjugation of glucuronic acid. The substances resulting from glucuronidation are known as glucuronosides (or glucuronides) and are often much more water-soluble than the non-glucuronic acid-containing precursor.
cytochrome metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cytochrome.
serotonin catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), a monoamine neurotransmitter occurring in the peripheral and central nervous systems, also having hormonal properties.
obsolete ethanol oxidation. OBSOLETE. An ethanol metabolic process in which ethanol is converted to acetyl-CoA via acetaldehyde and acetate.
glutathione biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glutathione, the tripeptide glutamylcysteinylglycine, which acts as a coenzyme for some enzymes and as an antioxidant in the protection of sulfhydryl groups in enzymes and other proteins.
glutathione derivative biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glutathione derivative.
aflatoxin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving aflatoxin, a fungal metabolite found as a contaminant in moldy grains that induces liver cancer. Aflatoxin induces a G to T transversion at codon 249 of p53, leading to its inactivation. Aflatoxin is converted to a chemical carcinogen by P450.
iron-sulfur cluster assembly. The incorporation of iron and exogenous sulfur into a metallo-sulfur cluster.
ferredoxin metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving ferredoxin, any simple, nonenzymatic iron-sulfur protein that is characterized by having equal numbers of atoms of iron and labile sulfur. Iron and sulfur atoms are present in one or two clusters of two or four atoms of each.
tRNA aminoacylation for protein translation. The synthesis of aminoacyl tRNA by the formation of an ester bond between the 3'-hydroxyl group of the most 3' adenosine of the tRNA and the alpha carboxylic acid group of an amino acid, to be used in ribosome-mediated polypeptide synthesis.
diphosphate metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving diphosphate, the anion or salt of diphosphoric acid.
purine-containing compound transmembrane transport. The process in which a purine-containing compound is transported across a membrane. A purine-containing compound is any compound that contains purine or a formal derivative thereof.
7-methylguanosine mRNA capping. The sequence of enzymatic reactions by which the mRNA 5' cap structure, an inverted 7-methylguanosine linked via a 5'-5' triphosphate bridge (m7G(5')ppp(5')X) to the first transcribed residue, is added to a nascent transcript. Additional methylation can occur on the ribose sugars of the first and second nucleotides adjacent to the m7G nRNA cap. These methylations are often referred to as N6,2'-O-dimethyladenosine (m6,2A) and N6,2'-O-dimethylguanosine (m6,2G), respectively.
transcription by RNA polymerase II. The synthesis of RNA from a DNA template by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II), originating at an RNA polymerase II promoter. Includes transcription of messenger RNA (mRNA) and certain small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs).
RNA metabolic process. The cellular chemical reactions and pathways involving RNA, ribonucleic acid, one of the two main type of nucleic acid, consisting of a long, unbranched macromolecule formed from ribonucleotides joined in 3',5'-phosphodiester linkage.
mRNA splicing, via spliceosome. The joining together of exons from one or more primary transcripts of messenger RNA (mRNA) and the excision of intron sequences, via a spliceosomal mechanism, so that mRNA consisting only of the joined exons is produced.
mRNA 3'-end processing. Any process involved in forming the mature 3' end of an mRNA molecule.
termination of RNA polymerase II transcription. A transcription termination process that completes the production of a primary RNA polymerase II transcript.
mRNA export from nucleus. The directed movement of mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
mRNA 3'-end processing by stem-loop binding and cleavage. Any mRNA 3'-end processing that involves the binding to and cleavage of a stem-loop structure. For example, histone mRNAs contain a highly conserved stem-loop sequence at the 3' end of the mRNA with a 6 base pairs (bp) stem and a 4-nt loop. The mRNA is cleaved between these two elements, after the fourth or fifth nucleotide, which is typically an adenosine.
mRNA metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving mRNA, messenger RNA, which is responsible for carrying the coded genetic 'message', transcribed from DNA, to sites of protein assembly at the ribosomes.
cytidine to uridine editing. The conversion of a cytosine residue to uridine in an RNA molecule by deamination.
adenosine to inosine editing. The conversion of an adenosine residue to inosine in an RNA molecule by deamination.
regulation of mRNA stability. Any process that modulates the propensity of mRNA molecules to degradation. Includes processes that both stabilize and destabilize mRNAs.
nuclear-transcribed mRNA poly(A) tail shortening. Shortening of the poly(A) tail of a nuclear-transcribed mRNA from full length to an oligo(A) length.
maternal-to-zygotic transition of gene expression. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of gene expression by which developmental control passes from the maternal genome to the zygotic genome.
obsolete exonucleolytic catabolism of deadenylated mRNA. OBSOLETE. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of the transcript body of a nuclear-transcribed mRNA that occurs when the ends are not protected by the 3'-poly(A) tail.
nuclear-transcribed mRNA catabolic process, nonsense-mediated decay. The nonsense-mediated decay pathway for nuclear-transcribed mRNAs degrades mRNAs in which an amino-acid codon has changed to a nonsense codon; this prevents the translation of such mRNAs into truncated, and potentially harmful, proteins.
rRNA processing. Any process involved in the conversion of a primary ribosomal RNA (rRNA) transcript into one or more mature rRNA molecules.
rRNA modification. The covalent alteration of one or more nucleotides within an rRNA molecule to produce an rRNA molecule with a sequence that differs from that coded genetically.
mitochondrial tRNA processing. The process in which a pre-tRNA molecule is converted to a mature tRNA, ready for addition of an aminoacyl group, in the mitochondrion.
tRNA processing. The process in which a pre-tRNA molecule is converted to a mature tRNA, ready for addition of an aminoacyl group.
tRNA modification. The covalent alteration of one or more nucleotides within a tRNA molecule to produce a tRNA molecule with a sequence that differs from that coded genetically.
mitochondrial tRNA modification. The covalent alteration of one or more nucleotides within a mitochondrial tRNA molecule to produce a mitochondrial tRNA molecule with a sequence that differs from that coded genetically.
spliceosomal snRNP assembly. The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of one or more snRNA and multiple protein components to form a ribonucleoprotein complex that is involved in formation of the spliceosome.
mitochondrial RNA catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of RNA transcribed from the mitochondrial genome and occurring in the mitochondrion.
regulation of mitochondrial mRNA stability. Any process that modulates the propensity of mitochondrial mRNA molecules to degradation. Includes processes that both stabilize and destabilize mitochondrial mRNAs.
translational initiation. The process preceding formation of the peptide bond between the first two amino acids of a protein. This includes the formation of a complex of the ribosome, mRNA or circRNA, and an initiation complex that contains the first aminoacyl-tRNA.
SRP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane. The targeting of proteins to a membrane that occurs during translation and is dependent upon two key components, the signal-recognition particle (SRP) and the SRP receptor. SRP is a cytosolic particle that transiently binds to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) signal sequence in a nascent protein, to the large ribosomal unit, and to the SRP receptor in the ER membrane.
translational elongation. The successive addition of amino acid residues to a nascent polypeptide chain during protein biosynthesis.
translational termination. The process resulting in the release of a polypeptide chain from the ribosome, usually in response to a termination codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA in the universal genetic code).
mitochondrial translational initiation. The process preceding formation of the peptide bond between the first two amino acids of a protein in a mitochondrion. This includes the formation of a complex of the ribosome, mRNA, and an initiation complex that contains the first aminoacyl-tRNA.
mitochondrial translational elongation. The successive addition of amino acid residues to a nascent polypeptide chain during protein biosynthesis in a mitochondrion.
mitochondrial translational termination. The process resulting in the release of a polypeptide chain from the ribosome in a mitochondrion, usually in response to a termination codon (note that mitochondria use variants of the universal genetic code that differ between different taxa).
protein folding. The process of assisting in the covalent and noncovalent assembly of single chain polypeptides or multisubunit complexes into the correct tertiary structure.
chaperone mediated protein folding independent of cofactor. The process of assisting in the correct noncovalent assembly of posttranslational proteins and does not depend on additional protein cofactors. This function occurs over one or more cycles of nucleotide-dependent binding and release.
post-chaperonin tubulin folding pathway. Completion of folding of alpha- and beta-tubulin; takes place subsequent to chaperonin-mediated partial folding; mediated by a complex of folding cofactors.
peptidyl-glutamic acid carboxylation. The gamma-carboxylation of peptidyl-glutamic acid; catalyzed by the vitamin K dependent gamma-glutamyl carboxylase.
endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport. The directed movement of substances from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi, mediated by COP II vesicles. Small COP II coated vesicles form from the ER and then fuse directly with the cis-Golgi. Larger structures are transported along microtubules to the cis-Golgi.
signal peptide processing. The proteolytic removal of a signal peptide from a protein during or after transport to a specific location in the cell.
peptidyl-lysine modification to peptidyl-hypusine. The modification of peptidyl-lysine to form hypusine, peptidyl-N6-(4-amino-2-hydroxybutyl)-L-lysine.
protein histidyl modification to diphthamide. The modification of peptidyl-histidine to 2'-(3-carboxamido-3-(trimethylammonio)propyl)-L-histidine, known as diphthamide, found in translation elongation factor EF-2. The process occurs in eukaryotes and archaea but not eubacteria.
protein hydroxylation. The addition of a hydroxy group to a protein amino acid.
protein N-linked glycosylation via asparagine. The glycosylation of protein via the N4 atom of peptidyl-asparagine forming N4-glycosyl-L-asparagine; the most common form is N-acetylglucosaminyl asparagine; N-acetylgalactosaminyl asparagine and N4 glucosyl asparagine also occur. This modification typically occurs in extracellular peptides with an N-X-(ST) motif. Partial modification has been observed to occur with cysteine, rather than serine or threonine, in the third position; secondary structure features are important, and proline in the second or fourth positions inhibits modification.
preassembly of GPI anchor in ER membrane. The stepwise addition of the components of the GPI anchor on to phosphatidylinositol lipids in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
attachment of GPI anchor to protein. A transamidation reaction that results in the cleavage of the polypeptide chain and the concomitant transfer of the GPI anchor to the newly formed carboxy-terminal amino acid of the anchored protein. The cleaved C-terminal contains the C-terminal GPI signal sequence of the newly synthesized polypeptide chain.
C-terminal protein lipidation. The covalent attachment of a lipid group to the carboxy-terminus of a protein.
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, a substance composed of N-acetylglucosamine, a common structural unit of oligosaccharides, in glycosidic linkage with uridine diphosphate.
GDP-mannose biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of GDP-mannose, a substance composed of mannose in glycosidic linkage with guanosine diphosphate.
endoplasmic reticulum mannose trimming. Any protein alpha-1,2-demannosylation that takes place in the endoplasmic reticulum quality control compartment (ERQC).
COPII vesicle coating. The addition of COPII proteins and adaptor proteins to ER membranes during the formation of transport vesicles, forming a vesicle coat.
Golgi apparatus mannose trimming. Any protein alpha-1,2-demannosylation that takes place in the Golgi apparatus.
protein O-linked fucosylation. The process of transferring a fucosyl group to a serine or threonine residues in a protein acceptor molecule, to form an O-linked protein-sugar linkage.
O-glycan processing. The stepwise addition of carbohydrate or carbohydrate derivative residues to the initially added O-linked residue (usually GalNAc) to form a core O-glycan structure.
protein O-linked glycosylation. A protein glycosylation process in which a carbohydrate or carbohydrate derivative unit is added to a protein via the hydroxyl group of peptidyl-serine, peptidyl-threonine, peptidyl-hydroxylysine, or peptidyl-hydroxyproline, or via the phenol group of peptidyl-tyrosine, forming an O-glycan.
mitotic nuclear membrane reassembly. The mitotic cell cycle process involving ESCRTIII that results in reformation of the nuclear envelope after mitotic nuclear division. In organisms undergoing closed mitosis this involves resealing or 'repair' of the nuclear envelope in the nuclear bridge.
negative regulation of transforming growth factor beta receptor signaling pathway. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of any TGF-beta receptor signaling pathway.
Wnt signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by binding of a Wnt protein to a frizzled family receptor on the surface of a target cell and ending with a change in cell state.
protein methylation. The addition of a methyl group to a protein amino acid. A methyl group is derived from methane by the removal of a hydrogen atom.
cellular response to chemical stress. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a chemical stimulus indicating the organism is under stress.
protein lipoylation. The lipoylation of peptidyl-lysine to form peptidyl-N6-lipoyl-L-lysine.
peptide hormone processing. The generation of a mature peptide hormone by posttranslational processing of a prohormone.
angiotensin maturation. The process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of angiotensin by conversion of angiotensinogen into mature angiotensin in the blood.
glucagon processing. The formation of mature glucagon by proteolysis of the precursor proglucagon.
regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of transcription mediated by RNA polymerase II.
protein repair. The process of restoring a protein to its original state after damage by such things as oxidation or spontaneous decomposition of residues.
amyloid fibril formation. The generation of amyloid fibrils, insoluble fibrous protein aggregates exhibiting beta sheet structure, from proteins.
mitochondrial protein catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a mitochondrial protein. This process is necessary to maintain the healthy state of mitochondria and is thought to occur via the induction of an intramitochondrial lysosome-like organelle that acts to eliminate the damaged oxidised mitochondrial proteins without destroying the mitochondrial structure.
double-strand break repair. The repair of double-strand breaks in DNA via homologous and nonhomologous mechanisms to reform a continuous DNA helix.
DNA damage response, signal transduction by p53 class mediator resulting in cell cycle arrest. A cascade of processes induced by the cell cycle regulator phosphoprotein p53, or an equivalent protein, in response to the detection of DNA damage and resulting in the stopping or reduction in rate of the cell cycle.
cell cycle checkpoint signaling. A signaling process that controls cell cycle progression by monitoring the integrity of specific cell cycle events. A cell cycle checkpoint begins with detection of deficiencies or defects and ends with signal transduction.
G2/M transition of mitotic cell cycle. The mitotic cell cycle transition by which a cell in G2 commits to M phase. The process begins when the kinase activity of M cyclin/CDK complex reaches a threshold high enough for the cell cycle to proceed. This is accomplished by activating a positive feedback loop that results in the accumulation of unphosphorylated and active M cyclin/CDK complex.
regulation of cell cycle G2/M phase transition. Any signaling pathway that modulates the activity of a cell cycle cyclin-dependent protein kinase to modulate the switch from G2 phase to M phase of the cell cycle.
mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint signaling. A mitotic cell cycle checkpoint that delays mitotic sister chromatid separation and consequently the mitotic metaphase/anaphase transition until the spindle is correctly assembled and chromosomes are attached to the spindle. Spindle assembly checkpoint signaling begins with the activated Mph family kinase, and results in the inhibition of the Anaphase Promoting Complex and its activator Sleepy/Cdc20 by the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC).
regulation of anaphase-promoting complex-dependent catabolic process. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of anaphase-promoting complex-dependent catabolic process.
mitotic cell cycle. Progression through the phases of the mitotic cell cycle, the most common eukaryotic cell cycle, which canonically comprises four successive phases called G1, S, G2, and M and includes replication of the genome and the subsequent segregation of chromosomes into daughter cells. In some variant cell cycles nuclear replication or nuclear division may not be followed by cell division, or G1 and G2 phases may be absent.
positive regulation of DNA replication. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of DNA replication.
G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle. The mitotic cell cycle transition by which a cell in G1 commits to S phase. The process begins with the build up of G1 cyclin-dependent kinase (G1 CDK), resulting in the activation of transcription of G1 cyclins. The process ends with the positive feedback of the G1 cyclins on the G1 CDK which commits the cell to S phase, in which DNA replication is initiated.
mitotic G1 phase. The cell cycle 'gap' phase which is the interval between the completion of DNA segregation by mitosis and the beginning of DNA synthesis.
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B signal transduction. An intracellular signaling cassette that starts with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation, production of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P), activation of PDK1, which recruits and ending with the activation of protein kinase B (PKB, also known as Akt). PI3K is activated by cell surface receptors. Note that PTEN is an inhibitor of the pathway.
positive regulation of cell cycle. Any process that activates or increases the rate or extent of progression through the cell cycle.
negative regulation of G0 to G1 transition. A cell cycle process that stops, prevents, or reduces the rate or extent of the transition from the G0 quiescent state to the G1 phase.
proteasome-mediated ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a protein or peptide by hydrolysis of its peptide bonds, initiated by the covalent attachment of ubiquitin, and mediated by the proteasome.
sister chromatid cohesion. The cell cycle process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome become tethered to each other.
regulation of mitotic cell cycle. Any process that modulates the rate or extent of progress through the mitotic cell cycle.
regulation of cell cycle. Any process that modulates the rate or extent of progression through the cell cycle.
regulation of G2/M transition of mitotic cell cycle. Any signaling pathway that modulates the activity of a cell cycle cyclin-dependent protein kinase to modulate the switch from G2 phase to M phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
negative regulation of mitotic cell cycle. Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the rate or extent of progression through the mitotic cell cycle.
Golgi inheritance. The partitioning of Golgi apparatus between daughter cells at cell division.
mitotic chromosome condensation. The cell cycle process in which chromatin structure is compacted prior to and during mitosis in eukaryotic cells.
mitotic nuclear membrane disassembly. The mitotic cell cycle process in which the controlled partial or complete breakdown of the nuclear membranes during occurs during mitosis.
mitotic M phase. A cell cycle phase during which nuclear division occurs, and which is comprises the phases: prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase and occurs as part of a mitotic cell cycle.
mitotic prometaphase. The cell cycle phase in higher eukaryotes which follows mitotic prophase and during which the nuclear envelope is disrupted and breaks into membrane vesicles, and the spindle microtubules enter the nuclear region. Kinetochores mature on each centromere and attach to some of the spindle microtubules. Kinetochore microtubules begin the process of aligning chromosomes in one plane halfway between the poles.
mitotic sister chromatid segregation. The cell cycle process in which replicated homologous chromosomes are organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two sets during the mitotic cell cycle. Each replicated chromosome, composed of two sister chromatids, aligns at the cell equator, paired with its homologous partner. One homolog of each morphologic type goes into each of the resulting chromosome sets.
regulation of mitotic spindle organization. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the microtubule spindle during a mitotic cell cycle.
mitotic spindle organization. A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the microtubule spindle during a mitotic cell cycle.
metaphase/anaphase transition of mitotic cell cycle. The cell cycle process in which a cell progresses from metaphase to anaphase during mitosis, triggered by the activation of the anaphase promoting complex by Cdc20/Sleepy homolog which results in the degradation of Securin.
anaphase-promoting complex-dependent catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a protein or peptide by hydrolysis of its peptide bonds, initiated by the covalent attachment of ubiquitin, with ubiquitin-protein ligation catalyzed by the anaphase-promoting complex, and mediated by the proteasome.
mitotic sister chromatid separation. The process in which sister chromatids are physically detached from each other during mitosis.
mitotic cytokinesis. A cell cycle process that results in the division of the cytoplasm of a cell after mitosis, resulting in the separation of the original cell into two daughter cells.
regulation of mitotic cell cycle phase transition. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of mitotic cell cycle phase transition.
regulation of exit from mitosis. Any process involved in the progression from anaphase/telophase to G1 that is associated with a conversion from high to low mitotic CDK activity.
CENP-A containing chromatin assembly. The formation of chromatin containing the histone H3 variant CENP-A to form centromeric chromatin. This specialised chromatin occurs at centromeric region in point centromeres, and the central core in modular centromeres.
telomere maintenance via telomerase. The maintenance of proper telomeric length by the addition of telomeric repeats by telomerase.
telomere maintenance via semi-conservative replication. The process in which telomeric DNA is synthesized semi-conservatively by the conventional replication machinery and telomeric accessory factors as part of cell cycle DNA replication.
telomere maintenance. Any process that contributes to the maintenance of proper telomeric length and structure by affecting and monitoring the activity of telomeric proteins, the length of telomeric DNA and the replication and repair of the DNA. These processes includes those that shorten, lengthen, replicate and repair the telomeric DNA sequences.
negative regulation of DNA recombination at telomere. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of genetic recombination within the telomere.
obsolete multicellular organism reproduction. OBSOLETE. The biological process in which new individuals are produced by one or two multicellular organisms. The new individuals inherit some proportion of their genetic material from the parent or parents.
cristae formation. The assembly of cristae, the inwards folds of the inner mitochondrial membrane.
ciliary basal body-plasma membrane docking. The docking of a cytosolic centriole/basal body to the plasma membrane via the ciliary transition fibers. In some species this may happen via an intermediate step, by first docking to the ciliary vesicle via the ciliary transition fibers. The basal body-ciliary vesicle then relocates to the plasma membrane, followed by the ciliary vesicle fusing with the plasma membrane, effectively attaching the basal body to the plasma membrane.
cilium assembly. The assembly of a cilium, a specialized eukaryotic organelle that consists of a filiform extrusion of the cell surface. Each cilium is bounded by an extrusion of the cytoplasmic membrane, and contains a regular longitudinal array of microtubules, anchored basally in a centriole.
intraciliary transport involved in cilium assembly. The bidirectional movement of large protein complexes along microtubules within a cilium that contributes to cilium assembly.
macroautophagy. The autophagic process that proceeds via the formation of an autophagosome.
aggrephagy. The selective degradation of protein aggregates by macroautophagy.
lipophagy. The selective degradation of lipid droplets by macroautophagy.
pexophagy. The selective autophagy process in which a peroxisome is degraded by macroautophagy.
late endosomal microautophagy. The autophagy process by which cytosolic proteins targeted for degradation are tagged with a chaperone and are directly transferred into and degraded in a late endosomal compartment.
chaperone-mediated autophagy. The autophagy process which begins when chaperones and co-chaperones recognize a target motif and unfold the substrate protein. The proteins are then transported to the lysosome where they are degraded.
epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by binding of a ligand to the tyrosine kinase receptor EGFR (ERBB1) on the surface of a cell. The pathway ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
signal transduction. The cellular process in which a signal is conveyed to trigger a change in the activity or state of a cell. Signal transduction begins with reception of a signal (e.g. a ligand binding to a receptor or receptor activation by a stimulus such as light), or for signal transduction in the absence of ligand, signal-withdrawal or the activity of a constitutively active receptor. Signal transduction ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. regulation of transcription or regulation of a metabolic process. Signal transduction covers signaling from receptors located on the surface of the cell and signaling via molecules located within the cell. For signaling between cells, signal transduction is restricted to events at and within the receiving cell.
insulin receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of the insulin receptor binding to insulin.
negative regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway activity.
fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of a fibroblast growth factor receptor binding to one of its physiological ligands.
nerve growth factor processing. The generation of a mature nerve growth factor (NGF) by proteolysis of a precursor.
activation of adenylate cyclase activity. Any process that initiates the activity of the inactive enzyme adenylate cyclase.
MAPK cascade. An intracellular protein kinase cascade containing at least a MAP kinase (MAPK). It starts with the activation of a MAP3K, and the consecutive activation of a MPK2K and a MAPK. The cascade can also contain an additional tier: the upstream MAP4K. The kinases in each tier phosphorylate and activate the kinase in the downstream tier to transmit a signal within a cell.
ERK1 and ERK2 cascade. A MAPK cascade containing at least the ERK1 or ERK2 MAP kinases. It starts with the activation of a MAP3K, and the consecutive activation of a MPK2K and of ERK1 or ERK2. The cascade can also contain an additional tier: the upstream MAP4K. The kinases in each tier phosphorylate and activate the kinase in the downstream tier. The ERK1/ERK2 cascade is activated by mitogens, growth factors, G protein-coupled receptors, and results in cellular responses such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation and development.
activation of phospholipase C activity. The initiation of the activity of the inactive enzyme phospolipase C as the result of The series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of a G protein-coupled receptor binding to its physiological ligand.
positive regulation of neurotrophin TRK receptor signaling pathway. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the neurotrophin TRK receptor signaling pathway.
positive regulation of Ras protein signal transduction. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of Ras protein signal transduction.
obsolete positive regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling. OBSOLETE. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of signal transduction mediated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase cascade.
positive regulation of tau-protein kinase activity. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of tau-protein kinase activity.
positive regulation of phospholipase C activity. Any process that increases the rate of phospholipase C activity.
positive regulation of extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway in absence of ligand. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway in absence of ligand.
insulin-like growth factor receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to an insulin-like growth factor receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
ERBB2 signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by binding of a ligand to the tyrosine kinase receptor ERBB2 on the surface of a cell. The pathway ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. ERBB2 receptors are themselves unable to bind to ligands, but act as a signal-amplifying tyrosine kinase within a heterodimeric pair.
regulation of cell motility. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell motility.
positive regulation of receptor signaling pathway via JAK-STAT. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway activity.
hepatocyte growth factor receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to a hepatocyte growth factor receptor, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
transforming growth factor beta receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by an extracellular ligand binding to a transforming growth factor beta receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
positive regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of transcription from an RNA polymerase II promoter.
BMP signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of a member of the BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) family to a receptor on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
adenylate cyclase-inhibiting G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway. A G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway in which the signal is transmitted via the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase activity and a subsequent decrease in the intracellular concentration of cyclic AMP (cAMP).
activation of protein kinase A activity. Any process that initiates the activity of the inactive enzyme protein kinase A.
adenylate cyclase-activating G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway. A G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway in which the signal is transmitted via the activation of adenylyl cyclase activity which results in an increase in the intracellular concentration of cyclic AMP (cAMP). This pathway is negatively regulated by phosphodiesterase, which cleaves cAMP and terminates the signaling.
Notch signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by an extracellular ligand binding to the receptor Notch on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
endocrine pancreas development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the endocrine pancreas over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The endocrine pancreas is made up of islet cells that produce insulin, glucagon and somatostatin.
positive regulation of transcription of Notch receptor target. The activation of transcription of specific genes as a result of Notch signaling, mediated by the Notch intracellular domain.
regulation of DNA-templated transcription. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cellular DNA-templated transcription.
negative regulation of Notch signaling pathway. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the Notch signaling pathway.
beta-catenin destruction complex disassembly. The disaggregation of a beta-catenin destruction complex into its constituent components.
beta-catenin-TCF complex assembly. The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a beta-catenin-TCF complex.
negative regulation of canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Any process that decreases the rate, frequency, or extent of the Wnt signaling pathway through beta-catenin, the series of molecular signals initiated by binding of a Wnt protein to a frizzled family receptor on the surface of the target cell, followed by propagation of the signal via beta-catenin, and ending with a change in transcription of target genes.
positive regulation of canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Any process that increases the rate, frequency, or extent of the Wnt signaling pathway through beta-catenin, the series of molecular signals initiated by binding of a Wnt protein to a frizzled family receptor on the surface of the target cell, followed by propagation of the signal via beta-catenin, and ending with a change in transcription of target genes.
Wnt signaling pathway, planar cell polarity pathway. A type of non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway in which Wnt binding to its receptor on the surface of a target cell results in the activation small G proteins such as Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 which, in turn activate effectors, including C-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and Rho kinase (Rok). The signaling ends with change in the transcription of target genes and/or reorganisation of the cytoskeleton.
hippo signaling. An intracellular signaling cascade that starts with the activation of hippo (STK4/MST1 and STK3/MST2 in mammals and hpo kinase in Drosophila). Hippo then phosphorylates LATS1/2, which in turn phosphoylates the transcriptional co-activator YAP1 (yki in Drosophila), leading to its cytosolic retention and/or degradation.
regulation of intracellular estrogen receptor signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of an intracellular estrogen receptor signaling pathway.
regulation of Wnt signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of the Wnt signal transduction pathway.
intracellular receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to a receptor located within a cell.
positive regulation of establishment of protein localization to mitochondrion. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of establishment of protein localization to mitochondrion.
regulation of small GTPase mediated signal transduction. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of small GTPase mediated signal transduction.
ephrin receptor signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by ephrin binding to its receptor, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
regulation of androgen receptor signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the androgen receptor signaling pathway.
positive regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway activity.
negative regulation of signal transduction. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of signal transduction.
apoptotic signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals which triggers the apoptotic death of a cell. The pathway starts with reception of a signal, and ends when the execution phase of apoptosis is triggered.
death-inducing signaling complex assembly. A process of protein complex assembly in which the arrangement and bonding together of the set of components that form the protein complex is mediated by a death domain (DD) interaction, as part of the extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway.
positive regulation of ceramide biosynthetic process. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of ceramide biosynthetic process.
regulation of tumor necrosis factor-mediated signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the rate or extent of the tumor necrosis factor-mediated signaling pathway. The tumor necrosis factor-mediated signaling pathway is the series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of tumor necrosis factor binding to a cell surface receptor.
regulation of necroptotic process. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of a necroptotic process, a necrotic cell death process that results from the activation of endogenous cellular processes, such as signaling involving death domain receptors or Toll-like receptors.
regulation of extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway via death domain receptors. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway via death domain receptors.
positive regulation of apoptotic process. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of cell death by apoptotic process.
regulation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process. Any process that modulates the activity of a cysteine-type endopeptidase involved in apoptosis.
negative regulation of cell cycle. Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the rate or extent of progression through the cell cycle.
negative regulation of apoptotic process. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of cell death by apoptotic process.
positive regulation of axonogenesis. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of axonogenesis.
negative regulation of axonogenesis. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of axonogenesis.
membrane protein intracellular domain proteolysis. The proteolytic cleavage of a transmembrane protein leading to the release of an intracellular domain.
erythropoietin-mediated signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals initiated by erythropoietin (EPO) binding to the erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R) on the surface of a target cell, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription.
positive regulation of receptor signaling pathway via STAT. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of receptor signaling pathway via STAT.
polysaccharide digestion. The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by living organisms to break down ingested polysaccharides into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
intestinal lipid absorption. A process in which lipids are taken up from the contents of the intestine.
intestinal hexose absorption. Uptake of hexoses, notably D-glucose, fructose, and galactose, into the blood by absorption from the small intestine.
adherens junction organization. A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an adherens junction. An adherens junction is a cell-cell junction composed of the epithelial cadherin-catenin complex at which the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane is attached to actin filaments.
miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional gene silencing. A post-transcriptional gene silencing pathway in which regulatory microRNAs (miRNAs) elicit silencing of specific target genes. miRNAs are endogenous 21-24 nucleotide small RNAs processed from stem-loop RNA precursors (pre-miRNAs). Once incorporated into a RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), miRNAs can downregulate protein production by either of two posttranscriptional mechanisms: endonucleolytic cleavage of the RNA (often mRNA) or mRNA translational repression, usually accompanied by poly-A tail shortening and subsequent degradation of the mRNA. miRNAs are present in all the animals and in plants, whereas siRNAs are present in lower animals and in plants.
regulation of cell-cell adhesion mediated by cadherin. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell-cell adhesion mediated by cadherin.
bicellular tight junction assembly. The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a tight junction, an occluding cell-cell junction that is composed of a branching network of sealing strands that completely encircles the apical end of each cell in an epithelial sheet.
cell-cell junction organization. A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cell-cell junction. A cell-cell junction is a specialized region of connection between two cells.
cell junction assembly. A cellular process that results in the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a cell junction.
hemidesmosome assembly. Assembly of hemidesmosomes, integrin-containing protein complexes that bind to laminin in the basal lamina. Hemidesmosomes form the contact between the basal surface of epithelial cells and the underlying basal lamina.
response to metal ion. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a metal ion stimulus.
cellular response to hypoxia. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating lowered oxygen tension. Hypoxia, defined as a decline in O2 levels below normoxic levels of 20.8 - 20.95%, results in metabolic adaptation at both the cellular and organismal level.
cellular response to heat. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a heat stimulus, a temperature stimulus above the optimal temperature for that organism.
regulation of cellular response to heat. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cellular response to heat.
cellular response to steroid hormone stimulus. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a steroid hormone stimulus.
regulation of eIF2 alpha phosphorylation by heme. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of eIF2 alpha phosphorylation as a result of heme levels.
PERK-mediated unfolded protein response. The series of molecular signals mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum membrane stress sensor PERK (PKR-like ER kinase). Begins with activation of PERK in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. The main substrate of PERK is the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha. Serine-phosphorylation of eIF2alpha by PERK inactivates eIF2alpha and inhibits general protein translation. In addition, eIF2alpha phosphorylation preferentially increases the translation of selective mRNAs such as ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4), which up regulates a subset of UPR genes required to restore folding capacity.
cellular response to amino acid starvation. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of deprivation of amino acids.
regulation of DNA-binding transcription factor activity. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of a transcription factor, any factor involved in the initiation or regulation of transcription.
ATF6-mediated unfolded protein response. The series of molecular signals mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum membrane stress sensor ATF6 (activating transcription factor 6). Begins with activation of ATF6 in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. Under conditions of endoplasmic reticulum stress, ATF6 translocates to the Golgi where it is processed by proteases to release a cytoplasmic domain (ATF6f), which operates as a transcriptional activator of many genes required to restore folding capacity.
IRE1-mediated unfolded protein response. The series of molecular signals mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor IRE1 (Inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endonuclease). Begins with activation of IRE1 in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. transcription. One target of activated IRE1 is the transcription factor HAC1 in yeast, or XBP1 in mammals; IRE1 cleaves an intron of a mRNA coding for HAC1/XBP1 to generate an activated HAC1/XBP1 transcription factor, which controls the up regulation of UPR-related genes. At least in mammals, IRE1 can also signal through additional intracellular pathways including JNK and NF-kappaB.
endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response. The series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of the presence of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or other ER-related stress; results in changes in the regulation of transcription and translation.
response to mitochondrial depolarisation. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) in response to the depolarization of one or more mitochondria.
activation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process. Any process that initiates the activity of the inactive enzyme cysteine-type endopeptidase in the context of an apoptotic process.
extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway in absence of ligand. The series of molecular signals in which a signal is conveyed from the cell surface to trigger the apoptotic death of a cell. The pathway starts with withdrawal of a ligand from a cell surface receptor, and ends when the execution phase of apoptosis is triggered.
regulation of apoptotic process. Any process that modulates the occurrence or rate of cell death by apoptotic process.
positive regulation of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization involved in apoptotic signaling pathway. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization involved in apoptotic signaling pathway.
intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway. The series of molecular signals in which an intracellular signal is conveyed to trigger the apoptotic death of a cell. The pathway starts with reception of an intracellular signal (e.g. DNA damage, endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative stress etc.), and ends when the execution phase of apoptosis is triggered. The intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway is crucially regulated by permeabilization of the mitochondrial outer membrane (MOMP).
activation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process by cytochrome c. Any process that initiates the activity of the inactive enzyme cysteine-type endopeptidase in the context of an apoptotic process and is mediated by cytochrome c.
execution phase of apoptosis. A stage of the apoptotic process that starts with the controlled breakdown of the cell through the action of effector caspases or other effector molecules (e.g. cathepsins, calpains etc.). Key steps of the execution phase are rounding-up of the cell, retraction of pseudopodes, reduction of cellular volume (pyknosis), chromatin condensation, nuclear fragmentation (karyorrhexis), plasma membrane blebbing and fragmentation of the cell into apoptotic bodies. When the execution phase is completed, the cell has died.
apoptotic DNA fragmentation. The cleavage of DNA during apoptosis, which usually occurs in two stages: cleavage into fragments of about 50 kbp followed by cleavage between nucleosomes to yield 200 bp fragments.
necroptotic process. A programmed necrotic cell death process which begins when a cell receives a signal (e.g. a ligand binding to a death receptor or to a Toll-like receptor), and proceeds through a series of biochemical events (signaling pathways), characterized by activation of receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 and/or 3 (RIPK1/3, also called RIP1/3) and by critical dependence on mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL), and which typically lead to common morphological features of necrotic cell death. The process ends when the cell has died. The process is divided into a signaling phase, and an execution phase, which is triggered by the former.
negative regulation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process. Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in the apoptotic process.
collagen fibril organization. Any process that determines the size and arrangement of collagen fibrils within an extracellular matrix.
muscle filament sliding. The sliding of actin thin filaments and myosin thick filaments past each other in muscle contraction. This involves a process of interaction of myosin located on a thick filament with actin located on a thin filament. During this process ATP is split and forces are generated.
potassium ion transmembrane transport. A process in which a potassium ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other.
cardiac conduction. Transfer of an organized electrical impulse across the heart to coordinate the contraction of cardiac muscles. The process begins with generation of an action potential (in the sinoatrial node (SA) in humans) and ends with a change in the rate, frequency, or extent of the contraction of the heart muscles.
transcription initiation at RNA polymerase II promoter. A transcription initiation process that takes place at a RNA polymerase II gene promoter. Messenger RNAs (mRNA) genes, as well as some non-coding RNAs, are transcribed by RNA polymerase II.
transcription initiation at RNA polymerase I promoter. A transcription initiation process that takes place at a RNA polymerase I gene promoter. Ribosomal RNAs (rRNA) genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase I.
rDNA heterochromatin formation. The formation of heterochromatin at ribosomal DNA, characterized by the modified histone H3K9me3.
termination of RNA polymerase I transcription. A transcription termination process that completes the production of a ribosomal RNA transcript. RNAP I termination requires binding of a terminator protein to specific sequences downstream of the transcription unit.
regulation of hematopoietic stem cell differentiation. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of hematopoietic stem cell differentiation.
granulocyte differentiation. The process in which a myeloid precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a granulocyte. Granulocytes are a class of leukocytes characterized by the presence of granules in their cytoplasm. These cells are active in allergic immune reactions such as arthritic inflammation and rashes. This class includes basophils, eosinophils and neutrophils.
regulation of myeloid cell differentiation. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of myeloid cell differentiation.
regulation of megakaryocyte differentiation. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of megakaryocyte differentiation.
regulation of regulatory T cell differentiation. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of differentiation of regulatory T cells.
regulation of B cell receptor signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of signaling pathways initiated by the cross-linking of an antigen receptor on a B cell.
regulation of cytokine-mediated signaling pathway. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the cytokine mediated signaling pathway.
regulation of bicellular tight junction assembly. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of tight junction assembly.
regulation of keratinocyte differentiation. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of keratinocyte differentiation.
epigenetic regulation of gene expression. A process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of gene expression through chromatin remodeling either by modifying higher order chromatin fiber structure, nucleosomal histones, or cytosine methylation of DNA. Once established, this regulation may be maintained over many cell divisions. It can also be heritable in the absence of the instigating signal.
transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II. The extension of an RNA molecule after transcription initiation and promoter clearance at an RNA polymerase II promoter by the addition of ribonucleotides catalyzed by RNA polymerase II.
snRNA transcription by RNA polymerase II. The synthesis of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) from a DNA template by RNA Polymerase II (Pol II), originating at a Pol II promoter.
transcription by RNA polymerase III. The synthesis of RNA from a DNA template by RNA polymerase III, originating at an RNAP III promoter.
transcription elongation by RNA polymerase III. The extension of an RNA molecule after transcription initiation and promoter clearance at an RNA polymerase III promoter by the addition of ribonucleotides catalyzed by RNA polymerase III.
termination of RNA polymerase III transcription. A transcription termination process that completes the production of a primary RNA polymerase II transcript. RNA polymerase III has an intrinsic ability to terminate transcription upon incorporation of at least 4 contiguous U residues.
transcription initiation at mitochondrial promoter. A transcription initiation process that takes place at a promoter on the mitochondrial chromosome.
termination of mitochondrial transcription. A transcription termination process that completes the production of a primary mitochondrial transcript.
miRNA metabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways involving miRNA, microRNA, a class of single-stranded RNA molecules of about 21-23 nucleotides in length, which regulates gene expression.
siRNA processing. A process leading to the generation of a functional small interfering RNA (siRNA). Includes the cleavage of double-stranded RNA to form small interfering RNA molecules (siRNAs) of 21-23 nucleotides. May also include amplification of the siRNA by RNA-directed RNA polymerase.
regulatory ncRNA-mediated post-transcriptional gene silencing. A posttranscriptional gene silencing pathway in which regulatory RNAs elicit silencing of specific target genes, either by mRNA destabilization or inhibition of translation.
regulation of miRNA-mediated gene silencing. A process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the downregulation of gene expression through the action of microRNAs (miRNAs).
piRNA processing. A process leading to the generation of a functional piRNA. piRNAs (Piwi-associated RNAs) are a class of 24- to 30-nucleotide RNAs derived from repeat or complex DNA sequence elements and processed by a Dicer-independent mechanism.
tRNA decay. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of tRNA, transfer RNA, a class of relatively small RNA molecules responsible for mediating the insertion of amino acids into the sequence of nascent polypeptide chains during protein synthesis.
negative regulation of gene expression, epigenetic. An epigenetic process that silences gene expression at specific genomic regions through chromatin remodeling either by modifying higher order chromatin fiber structure, nucleosomal histones, or the cytosine DNA methylation.
DNA demethylation. The removal of a methyl group from one or more nucleotides within an DNA molecule.
transcription initiation-coupled chromatin remodeling. An epigenetic mechanism of regulation of gene expression that involves chromatin remodeling to capacitate gene expression by either modifying the chromatin fiber, the nucleosomal histones, or the DNA.
obsolete DNA methylation on cytosine. OBSOLETE. The covalent transfer of a methyl group to C-5 or N-4 of cytosine in a DNA molecule.
membrane depolarization. The process in which membrane potential decreases with respect to its steady-state potential, usually from negative potential to a more positive potential. For example, the initial depolarization during the rising phase of an action potential is in the direction from the negative steady-state resting potential towards the positive membrane potential that will be the peak of the action potential.
gamma-aminobutyric acid biosynthetic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 4-aminobutyrate), an amino acid which acts as a neurotransmitter in some organisms.
neurotransmitter secretion. The regulated release of neurotransmitter from the presynapse into the synaptic cleft via calcium-regulated exocytosis during synaptic transmission.
gamma-aminobutyric acid catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 4-aminobutyrate), an amino acid which acts as a neurotransmitter in some organisms.
dopamine catabolic process. The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of dopamine, a catecholamine neurotransmitter and a metabolic precursor of noradrenaline and adrenaline.
regulation of NMDA receptor activity. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of N-methyl-D-aspartate selective glutamate receptor activity.
positive regulation of potassium ion transmembrane transport. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of potassium ion transmembrane transport.
response to bacterium. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a bacterium.
symbiont entry into host cell. The process by which a symbiont breaches the plasma membrane or cell envelope and enters the host cell. The process ends when the symbiont or its genome is released into the host cell.
symbiont-mediated perturbation of host defense response. A process in which a symbiont interferes with the ability of the host to mount a defense in response to its presence. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
symbiont-mediated suppression of host innate immune response. A process in which a symbiont inhibits or disrupts the normal execution of the innate immune response of the host organism, the host's first line of defense against infection. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
modulation by symbiont of host process. The process in which a symbiont organism effects a change in the structure or processes of its host organism.
symbiont-mediated suppression of host apoptosis. A process in which a symbiont inhibits or disrupts the normal execution of host apoptosis, leading to a decrease in the frequency, rate or extent of apoptosis in the host cell. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
symbiont-mediated suppression of host defense-related programmed cell death. Any process in which a symbiont stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of defense-related programmed cell death in the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
symbiont-mediated detoxification of host-generated reactive oxygen species. A process in which a symbiont interferes with, inhibits or disrupts the host reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated innate immune response by directly degrading host ROS. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
symbiont defense to host-produced reactive oxygen species. A process in which a symbiont alters or subverts either the host signal transduction pathways leading to the production of reactive oxygen species as part of the host innate immune response.
siderophore-dependent iron import into cell. A process in which iron (Fe3+) is solubilized by ferric iron-specific chelators, known as siderophores, excreted by a cell; the iron-siderophore complex is then transported into the cell by specific cell surface receptors.
symbiont-mediated killing of host cell. A process mediated by a symbiont that results in the death of a cell in the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
response to antibiotic. Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an antibiotic stimulus. An antibiotic is a chemical substance produced by a microorganism which has the capacity to inhibit the growth of or to kill other microorganisms.
symbiont entry into host. Entry of a symbiont into the body, tissues, or cells of a host organism as part of the symbiont life cycle. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
uncoating of virus. The process by which an incoming virus is disassembled in the host cell to release a replication-competent viral genome.
viral process. A multi-organism process in which a virus is a participant. The other participant is the host. Includes infection of a host cell, replication of the viral genome, and assembly of progeny virus particles. In some cases the viral genetic material may integrate into the host genome and only subsequently, under particular circumstances, 'complete' its life cycle.
RNA-templated DNA biosynthetic process. A DNA biosynthetic process that uses RNA as a template for RNA-dependent DNA polymerases (e.g. reverse transcriptase) that synthesize the new strand.
establishment of integrated proviral latency. A process by which the virus integrates into the host genome and establishes as a stable provirus or prophage.
viral transcription. The process by which a viral genome, or part of a viral genome, is transcribed within the host cell.
positive regulation of viral transcription. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of viral transcription.
viral protein processing. Any protein maturation process achieved by the cleavage of a peptide bond or bonds within a viral protein.
intracellular transport of virus. The directed movement of a virus, or part of a virus, within the host cell.
virion assembly. A late phase of the viral life cycle during which all the components necessary for the formation of a mature virion collect at a particular site in the cell and the basic structure of the virus particle is formed.
viral life cycle. A set of processes which all viruses follow to ensure survival; includes attachment and entry of the virus particle, decoding of genome information, translation of viral mRNA by host ribosomes, genome replication, and assembly and release of viral particles containing the genome.
receptor-mediated endocytosis of virus by host cell. Any receptor-mediated endocytosis that is involved in the uptake of a virus into a host cell; successive instances of virus endocytosis result in the accumulation of virus particles within the cell.
fusion of virus membrane with host plasma membrane. Fusion of a viral membrane with the host cell membrane during viral entry. Results in release of the virion contents into the cytoplasm.
symbiont-mediated suppression of host mRNA processing. A process in which a symbiont inhibits or disrupts mRNA processing in its host. mRNA processing is the conversion of a primary mRNA transcript into one or more mature mRNA(s) prior to translation into polypeptide. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
viral genome maturation. The processes involved in creating a mature, stable viral genome. Begins after genome replication with a newly synthesized nucleic acid and ends when the genome is ready to be packaged. Includes the addition of proteins to the newly synthesized genome, and DNA repair processes.
intracellular transport of viral protein in host cell. The directed movement of a viral protein within the host cell.
viral genome packaging. The encapsulation of the viral genome within the capsid.
viral release from host cell. The dissemination of mature viral particles from a host cell, e.g. by cell lysis or the budding of virus particles from the cell membrane.
obsolete induction by virus of host immune response. OBSOLETE. The induction by a virus of an immune response in the host organism.
viral translation. A process by which viral mRNA is translated into viral protein, using the host cellular machinery.
induction by virus of host cell-cell fusion. The process of syncytia-forming cell-cell fusion, caused by a virus.
membrane organization. A process which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a membrane. A membrane is a double layer of lipid molecules that encloses all cells, and, in eukaryotes, many organelles; may be a single or double lipid bilayer; also includes associated proteins.
positive regulation of cell killing. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of cell killing.
germ cell development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an immature germ cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure (gamete). A germ cell is any reproductive cell in a multicellular organism.
sperm-egg recognition. The initial contact step made between the sperm plasma membrane and outer layer of the egg during fertilization.
acrosome reaction. The discharge, by sperm, of a single, anterior secretory granule following the sperm's attachment to the zona pellucida of the oocyte. The process begins with the fusion of the outer acrosomal membrane with the sperm plasma membrane and ends with the exocytosis of the acrosomal contents into the zona pellucida.
sensory perception. The series of events required for an organism to receive a sensory stimulus, convert it to a molecular signal, and recognize and characterize the signal. This is a neurological process.
rhodopsin mediated signaling pathway. A G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway initiated by the excitation of rhodopsin by a photon, and ending with the regulation of a downstream cellular process.
sensory perception of sound. The series of events required for an organism to receive an auditory stimulus, convert it to a molecular signal, and recognize and characterize the signal. Sonic stimuli are detected in the form of vibrations and are processed to form a sound.
retrograde vesicle-mediated transport, Golgi to endoplasmic reticulum. The directed movement of substances from the Golgi back to the endoplasmic reticulum, mediated by vesicles bearing specific protein coats such as COPI or COG.
post-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport. The directed movement of substances from the Golgi to other parts of the cell, including organelles and the plasma membrane, mediated by small transport vesicles.
gap junction assembly. Assembly of gap junctions, which are found in most animal tissues, and serve as direct connections between the cytoplasms of adjacent cells. They provide open channels through the plasma membrane, allowing ions and small molecules (less than approximately a thousand daltons) to diffuse freely between neighboring cells, but preventing the passage of proteins and nucleic acids.
endosomal transport. The directed movement of substances mediated by an endosome, a membrane-bounded organelle that carries materials enclosed in the lumen or located in the endosomal membrane.
receptor-mediated endocytosis. An endocytosis process in which cell surface receptors ensure specificity of transport. A specific receptor on the cell surface binds tightly to the extracellular macromolecule (the ligand) that it recognizes; the plasma-membrane region containing the receptor-ligand complex then undergoes endocytosis, forming a transport vesicle containing the receptor-ligand complex and excluding most other plasma-membrane proteins. Receptor-mediated endocytosis generally occurs via clathrin-coated pits and vesicles.
depurination. The disruption of the bond between the sugar in the backbone and the A or G base, causing the base to be removed and leaving a depurinated sugar.
depyrimidination. The disruption of the bond between the sugar in the backbone and the C or T base, causing the base to be removed and leaving a depyrimidinated sugar.
base-excision repair, AP site formation. The formation of an AP site, a deoxyribose sugar with a missing base, by DNA glycosylase which recognizes an altered base in DNA and catalyzes its hydrolytic removal. This sugar phosphate is the substrate recognized by the AP endonuclease, which cuts the DNA phosphodiester backbone at the 5' side of the altered site to leave a gap which is subsequently repaired.
base-excision repair, gap-filling. Repair of the damaged strand by the combined action of an apurinic endouclease that degrades a few bases on the damaged strand and a polymerase that synthesizes a 'patch' in the 5' to 3' direction, using the undamaged strand as a template.
base-excision repair. In base excision repair, an altered base is removed by a DNA glycosylase enzyme, followed by excision of the resulting sugar phosphate. The small gap left in the DNA helix is filled in by the sequential action of DNA polymerase and DNA ligase.
positive regulation of error-prone translesion synthesis. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of error-prone translesion synthesis.
error-prone translesion synthesis. The conversion of DNA-damage induced single-stranded gaps into large molecular weight DNA after replication by using a specialized DNA polymerase or replication complex to insert a defined nucleotide across the lesion. This process does not remove the replication-blocking lesions and causes an increase in the endogenous mutation level. For example, in E. coli, a low fidelity DNA polymerase, pol V, copies lesions that block replication fork progress. This produces mutations specifically targeted to DNA template damage sites, but it can also produce mutations at undamaged sites.
error-free translesion synthesis. The conversion of DNA-damage induced single-stranded gaps into large molecular weight DNA after replication by using a specialized DNA polymerase or replication complex to insert a defined nucleotide across the lesion. This process does not remove the replication-blocking lesions but does not causes an increase in the endogenous mutation level. For S. cerevisiae, RAD30 encodes DNA polymerase eta, which incorporates two adenines. When incorporated across a thymine-thymine dimer, it does not increase the endogenous mutation level.
translesion synthesis. The replication of damaged DNA by synthesis across a lesion in the template strand; a specialized DNA polymerase or replication complex inserts a defined nucleotide across from the lesion which allows DNA synthesis to continue beyond the lesion. This process can be mutagenic depending on the damaged nucleotide and the inserted nucleotide.
DNA alkylation repair. The repair of alkylation damage in DNA, e.g. the removal of a non-physiological alkyl group from a nucleobase. This is usually mediated by DNA alkyltransferases.
DNA repair. The process of restoring DNA after damage. Genomes are subject to damage by chemical and physical agents in the environment (e.g. UV and ionizing radiations, chemical mutagens, fungal and bacterial toxins, etc.) and by free radicals or alkylating agents endogenously generated in metabolism. DNA is also damaged because of errors during its replication. A variety of different DNA repair pathways have been reported that include direct reversal, base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, photoreactivation, bypass, double-strand break repair pathway, and mismatch repair pathway.
double-strand break repair via homologous recombination. The error-free repair of a double-strand break in DNA in which the broken DNA molecule is repaired using homologous sequences. A strand in the broken DNA searches for a homologous region in an intact chromosome to serve as the template for DNA synthesis. The restoration of two intact DNA molecules results in the exchange, reciprocal or nonreciprocal, of genetic material between the intact DNA molecule and the broken DNA molecule.
double-strand break repair via synthesis-dependent strand annealing. SDSA is a major mechanism of double-strand break repair in mitosis which allows for the error-free repair of a double-strand break without the exchange of adjacent sequences. The broken DNA searches for and base pairs with a homologous region in an intact chromosome. DNA synthesis initiates from the 3' end of the invading DNA strand, using the intact chromosome as the template. Newly synthesized DNA is then displaced from the template and anneal with its complement on the other side of the double-strand break.
double-strand break repair via nonhomologous end joining. The repair of a double-strand break in DNA in which the two broken ends are rejoined with little or no sequence complementarity. Information at the DNA ends may be lost due to the modification of broken DNA ends. This term covers instances of separate pathways, called classical (or canonical) and alternative nonhomologous end joining (C-NHEJ and A-NHEJ). These in turn may further branch into sub-pathways, but evidence is still unclear.
nucleotide-excision repair, DNA damage recognition. The identification of lesions in DNA, such as pyrimidine-dimers, intrastrand cross-links, and bulky adducts. The wide range of substrate specificity suggests the repair complex recognizes distortions in the DNA helix.
global genome nucleotide-excision repair. The nucleotide-excision repair process in which DNA lesions are removed from nontranscribed strands and from transcriptionally silent regions over the entire genome.
obsolete nucleotide-excision repair, DNA incision. OBSOLETE. A process that results in the endonucleolytic cleavage of the damaged strand of DNA. The incision occurs at the junction of single-stranded DNA and double-stranded DNA that is formed when the DNA duplex is unwound.
nucleotide-excision repair, DNA gap filling. Repair of the gap in the DNA helix by DNA polymerase and DNA ligase after the portion of the strand containing the lesion has been removed by pyrimidine-dimer repair enzymes.
transcription-coupled nucleotide-excision repair. The nucleotide-excision repair process that carries out preferential repair of DNA lesions on the actively transcribed strand of the DNA duplex. In addition, the transcription-coupled nucleotide-excision repair pathway is required for the recognition and repair of a small subset of lesions that are not recognized by the global genome nucleotide excision repair pathway.
mismatch repair. A system for the correction of errors in which an incorrect base, which cannot form hydrogen bonds with the corresponding base in the parent strand, is incorporated into the daughter strand. The mismatch repair system promotes genomic fidelity by repairing base-base mismatches, insertion-deletion loops and heterologies generated during DNA replication and recombination.
interstrand cross-link repair. Removal of a DNA interstrand crosslink (a covalent attachment of DNA bases on opposite strands of the DNA) and restoration of the DNA. DNA interstrand crosslinks occur when both strands of duplex DNA are covalently tethered together (e.g. by an exogenous or endogenous agent), thus preventing the strand unwinding necessary for essential DNA functions such as transcription and replication.
epigenetic programming in the zygotic pronuclei. The global programming of epigenetic modifications in the zygote following fertilization. The paternal genome undergoes active DNA demethylation before the first cell division, while the adjacent maternal genome is protected from this process.
somatic stem cell population maintenance. Any process by which an organism retains a population of somatic stem cells, undifferentiated cells in the embryo or adult which can undergo unlimited division and give rise to cell types of the body other than those of the germ-line.
primitive streak formation. The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the primitive streak from unspecified parts. The primitive streak is a ridge of cells running along the midline of the embryo where the mesoderm ingresses. It defines the anterior-posterior axis.
epithelial to mesenchymal transition. A transition where an epithelial cell loses apical/basolateral polarity, severs intercellular adhesive junctions, degrades basement membrane components and becomes a migratory mesenchymal cell.
lateral mesoderm formation. The process that gives rise to the lateral mesoderm. This process pertains to the initial formation of the structure from unspecified parts.
intermediate mesoderm formation. The process that gives rise to the intermediate mesoderm. This process pertains to the initial formation of the structure from unspecified parts.
nephric duct formation. The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a nephric duct. A nephric duct is a tube that drains a primitive kidney.
paraxial mesoderm formation. The process that gives rise to the paraxial mesoderm. This process pertains to the initial formation of the structure from unspecified parts.
somitogenesis. The formation of mesodermal clusters that are arranged segmentally along the anterior posterior axis of an embryo.
axial mesoderm formation. The process that gives rise to the axial mesoderm. This process pertains to the initial formation of the structure from unspecified parts.
endoderm formation. The formation of the endoderm during gastrulation.
anterior neural plate formation. The formation of anterior end of the flat, thickened layer of ectodermal cells known as the neural plate.
posterior neural plate formation. The formation of posterior end of the flat, thickened layer of ectodermal cells known as the neural plate.
neural plate pattern specification. The developmental process that results in the creation of defined areas or spaces within the neural plate to which cells respond and eventually are instructed to differentiate.
embryo development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an embryo from its formation until the end of its embryonic life stage. The end of the embryonic stage is organism-specific. For example, for mammals, the process would begin with zygote formation and end with birth. For insects, the process would begin at zygote formation and end with larval hatching. For plant zygotic embryos, this would be from zygote formation to the end of seed dormancy. For plant vegetative embryos, this would be from the initial determination of the cell or group of cells to form an embryo until the point when the embryo becomes independent of the parent plant.
ureteric bud formation. The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the ureteric bud from the Wolffian duct. This process begins when the bud protrudes from the duct and ends when it is a recognizable bud.
Rac protein signal transduction. An intracellular signaling cassette in which a small monomeric GTPase of the Rac subfamily relays a signal.
nervous system development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of nervous tissue over time, from its formation to its mature state.
positive regulation of muscle cell differentiation. Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of muscle cell differentiation.
heart formation. The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the heart from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the heart field and the arrival of cardiac neural crest to the heart region. The process ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
metanephric nephron development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a nephron in the metanephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A nephron is the functional unit of the kidney.
regulation of type B pancreatic cell development. Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of pancreatic B cell development.
male gonad development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the male gonad over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
keratinization. The process in which the cytoplasm of the outermost cells of the vertebrate epidermis is replaced by keratin. Keratinization occurs in the stratum corneum, feathers, hair, claws, nails, hooves, and horns.
cornification. A type of programmed cell death that occurs in the epidermis, morphologically and biochemically distinct from apoptosis. It leads to the formation of corneocytes, i.e. dead keratinocytes containing an amalgam of specific proteins (e.g., keratin, loricrin, SPR and involucrin) and lipids (e.g., fatty acids and ceramides), which are necessary for the function of the cornified skin layer (mechanical resistance, elasticity, water repellence and structural stability).
keratinocyte development. The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a keratinocyte over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
regulation of brown fat cell differentiation. Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of brown fat cell differentiation. Brown fat cell differentiation is the process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a brown adipocyte, an animal connective tissue cell involved in adaptive thermogenesis. Brown adipocytes contain multiple small droplets of triglycerides and a high number of mitochondria.
